Module 2

Technical Analysis

1.1 – Overview
The previous module set us on a good plane with the basic understanding about the
stock markets. Taking cues from the previous module, we now know that
developing a well researched point of view is critical for stock market success. A
good point of view should have a directional view and should also include
information such as:
1. Price at which one should buy and sell stocks
2. Risk involved
3. Expected reward
4. Expected holding period
Technical Analysis (also abbreviated as TA) is a popular technique that allows you to
do just that. It not only helps you develop a point of view on a particular stock or
index but also helps you define the trade keeping in mind the entry, exit and risk
perspective.
Like all research techniques, Technical Analysis also comes with its own attributes,
some of which can be highly complex. However technology makes it easy to
understand. We will discover these attributes as we proceed along this module.

1.2 – Technical Analysis, what is it?
Consider this analogy.
Imagine you are vacationing in a foreign country where everything including the
language, culture, climate, and food is new to you. On day 1, you do the regular
touristy activities, and by evening you are very hungry. You want to end your day by
having a great dinner. You ask around for a good restaurant and you are told about
a nice food street which is close by. You decide to give it a try.
To your surprise, there are many vendors selling different varieties of food.
Everything looks different and interesting. You are absolutely clueless as to what to
eat for dinner. To add to your dilemma you cannot ask around as you do not know
the local language. So given all this, how will you make a decision on what to eat?

1

Well, you have two options to figure out what to eat.
Option 1: You visit a vendor, figure out what they are cooking / selling. Check on the
ingredients used, cooking style, probably taste a bit and figure out if you actually like
the food. You repeat this exercise across a few vendors, after which you would most
likely end up eating at a place that satisfies you the most.
The advantage with this technique is that you know exactly what you are eating
since you have researched about it on your own. However on the flip side, the
methodology you adopted is not really scalable as there could be about 100 odd
vendors, and with limited time at your disposal, you can probably cover about 4 or 5
vendors. Hence there is a high probability that you could have missed the best
tasting food on the street!
Option 2: You just stand in a corner and observe all the vendors. You try and find a
vendor who is attracting the maximum crowd. Once you find such a vendor you
make a simple assumption -‘The vendor is attracting so many customers which
means he must be making the best food!’ Based on your assumption and the
crowd’s preference you decide to go to that particular vendor for your dinner.
Chances are that you could be eating the best tasting food available on the street.
The advantage of this method is the scalability. You just need to spot the vendor
with the maximum number of customers and bet on the fact that the food is good
based on the crowd’s preference. However, on the flipside the crowd need not
always be right.
If you could recognize, option 1 is very similar to Fundamental Analysis where you
research about a few companies thoroughly. We will explore about Fundamental
Analysis in greater detail in the next module.

2

Option 2 is very similar to Technical Analysis where one scans for opportunities
based on the current trend aka the preference of the market.
Technical Analysis is a research technique to identify trading opportunities in
market based on the actions of market participants. The actions of markets
participants can be visualized by means of a stock chart. Over time, patterns are
formed within these charts and each pattern conveys a certain message. The job of
a technical analyst is to identify these patterns and develop a point of view.
Like any research technique, technical analysis stands on a bunch of assumptions.
As a practitioner of technical analysis, you need to trade the markets keeping these
assumptions in perspective. Of course we will understand these assumptions in
details as we proceed along.
Also, at this point it makes sense to throw some light on a matter concerning FA and
TA. Often people get into the argument contending a particular research technique
is a better approach to market. However in reality there is no such thing as the best
research approach. Every research method has its own merits and demerits. It
would be futile to spend time comparing TA and FA in order to figure out which is a
better approach.
Both the techniques are different and not comparable. In fact a prudent trader
would spend time educating himself on both the techniques so that he can identify
great trading or investing opportunities.

1.3 – Setting expectations
Often market participants approach technical analysis as a quick and easy way to
make a windfall gain in the markets. On the contrary, technical analysis is anything
but quick and easy. Yes, if done right, a windfall gain is possible but in order get to
that stage one has to put in the required effort to learn the technique.
If you approach TA as a quick and easy way to make money in markets, trading
catastrophe is bound to happen. When a trading debacle happens, more often than
not the blame is on technical analysis and not on the trader’s inability to efficiently
apply Technical Analysis to markets. Hence before you start delving deeper into
technical analysis it is important to set expectations on what can and cannot be
achieved with technical analysis.
1. Trades – TA is best used to identify short term trades. Do not use TA to identify long
term investment opportunities. Long term investment opportunities are best
identified using fundamental analysis. Also, If you are a fundamental analyst, use TA
to calibrate the entry and exit points
2. Return per trade – TA based trades are usually short term in nature. Do not expect
huge returns within a short duration of time. The trick with being successful with TA

3

is to identify frequent short term trading opportunities which can give you small but
consistent profits.
3. Holding Period – Trades based on technical analysis can last anywhere between
few minutes and few weeks, and usually not beyond that. We will explore this
aspect when we discuss the topic on timeframes.
4. Risk – Often traders initiate a trade for a certain reason, however in case of an
adverse movement in the stock, the trade starts making a loss. Usually in such
situations, traders hold on to their loss making trade with a hope they can recover
the loss. Remember, TA based trades are short term, in case the trade goes sour, do
remember to cut the losses and move on to identify another opportunity.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. Technical Analysis is a popular method to develop a point of view on markets.
Besides, TA also helps in identifying entry and exit points
2. Technical Analysis visualizes the actions of market participants in the form of stock
charts
3. Patterns are formed within the charts and these patterns help a trader identify
trading opportunities
4. TA works best when we keep a few core assumptions in perspective
5. TA is used best to identify short terms trades

4

Chapter 3

Introducing Technical Analysis
69

2.1– Overview
In the previous chapter we briefly understood what Technical Analysis was all about.
In this chapter we will focus on the versatility and the assumptions of Technical
Analysis.

2.2 – Application on asset types
Probably one of the greatest versatile features of technical analysis is the fact you
can apply TA on any asset class as long as the asset type has historical time series
data. Time series data in technical analysis context is information pertaining to the
price variables namely – open high, low, close, volume etc.
Here is an analogy that may help. Think about learning how to drive a car. Once you
learn how to drive a car, you can literally drive any type of car. Likewise you only
need to learn technical analysis once. Once you do so, you can apply the concept of
TA on any asset class – equities, commodities, foreign exchange, fixed income etc.
This is also probably one of the biggest advantages of TA when compared to the
other fields of study. For example when it comes to fundamental analysis of equity,
one has to study the profit and loss, balance sheet, and cash flow statements.
However fundamental analysis for commodities is completely different.

5

If you are dealing with agricultural commodity like Coffee or Pepper then the
fundamental analysis includes analyzing rainfall, harvest, demand, supply, inventory
etc. However the fundamentals of metal commodities are different, so is for energy
commodities. So every time you choose a commodity, the fundamentals change.
However the concept of technical analysis will remain the same irrespective of the
asset you are studying. For example, an indicator such as ‘Moving average
convergence divergence’ (MACD) or ‘Relative strength index’ (RSI) is used exactly the
same way on equity, commodity or currency.

2.3 – Assumption in Technical Analysis
Unlike fundamental analysts, technical analysts don’t care whether a stock is
undervalued or overvalued. In fact the only thing that matters is the stocks past
trading data (price and volume) and what information this data can provide about
the future movement in the security.
Technical Analysis is based on few key assumptions. One needs to be aware of
these assumptions to ensure the best results.
1) Markets discount everything – This assumption tells us that, all known and
unknown information in the public domain is reflected in the latest stock price. For
example there could be an insider in the company buying the company’s stock in
large quantity in anticipation of a good quarterly earnings announcement. While he
does this secretively, the price reacts to his actions thus revealing to the technical
analyst that this could be a good buy.
2) The ‘how’ is more important than ‘why’ – This is an extension to the first
assumption. Going with the same example as discussed above – the technical
analyst would not be interested in questioning why the insider bought the stock as
long he knows how the price reacted to the insider’s action.
3) Price moves in trend – All major moves in the market is an outcome of a trend.
The concept of trend is the foundation of technical analysis. For example the recent
upward movement in the NIFTY Index to 7700 from 6400 did not happen overnight.
This move happened in a phased manner, in over 11 months. Another way to look
at it is, once the trend is established, the price moves in the direction of the trend.
4) History tends to repeat itself – In the technical analysis context, the price trend
tends to repeat itself. This happens because the market participants consistently
react to price movements in a remarkably similar way, each and every time the price
moves in a certain direction. For example in up trending markets, market
participants get greedy and want to buy irrespective of the high price. Likewise in a
down trend, market participants want to sell irrespective of the low and unattractive
prices. This human reaction ensures that the price history repeats itself.

6

2.4 – The Trade Summary
The Indian stock market is open from 9:15 AM to 15:30 PM. During the 6 hour 15
minute market session, there are millions of trades that take place. Think about an
individual stock – every minute there is a trade that gets executed on the exchange.
The question is, as a market participant, do we need to keep track of all the different
price points at which a trade is executed?
To illustrate this further, let us consider this imaginary stock in which there are
many trades. Look at the picture below. Each point refers to a trade being executed
at a particular time. If one manages to plot a graph which includes every second
from 9:15 AM to 15:30 PM, the graph will be cluttered with many points. Hence in
the chart below, for ease of understating I’ve plotted a limited time scale period:

Market opened at 9:15 AM and closed at 15:30 PM during which there were many
trades. It will be practically impossible to track all these different price points. In fact
what one needs is a summary of the trading action and not really the details on all
the different price points.
By tracking the Open, high, low and close we can draw a summary of the price
action.
The open – When the markets open for trading, the first price at which a trade
executes is called the opening Price.
The high – This represents the highest price at which the market participants were
willing to transact for the given day.
The Low – This represents the lowest level at which the market participants were
willing to transact for the given day.
The close – The Close price is the most important price because it is the final price
at which the market closed for a particular period of time. The close serves as an
indicator for the intraday strength. If the close is higher than the open, then it is

7

considered a positive day else negative. Of course we will deal with this in a greater
detail as we progress through the module.
The closing price also shows the market sentiment and serves as a reference point
for the next day’s trading. For these reasons, closing price is more important than
the Open, High or Low prices.
The open, high, low, close prices are the main data points from the technical
analysis perspective. Each of these prices have to be plotted on the chart and
analyzed.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. Technical Analysis is not bound by its scope. The concepts of TA can be applied
across any asset class as long as it has a time series data
2. TA is based on few core assumptions.
1. Markets discount everything
2. The how is more important than why
3. Price moves in trends
4. History tends to repeat itself

3. A good way to summarize the daily trading action is by marking the open, high, low
and close prices usually abbreviated as OHLC

8

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 3

The Chart Types
136

3.1– Overview
Having recognized that the Open (O), high (H), low (L), and close (C) serves as the
best way to summarize the trading action for the given time period, we need a
charting technique that displays this information in the most comprehensible way. If
not for a good charting technique, charts can get quite complex. Each trading day
has four data points’ i.e the OHLC. If we are looking at a 10 day chart, we need to
visualize 40 data points (1 day x 4 data points per day). So you can imagine how
complex it would be to visualize 6 months or a year’s data.
As you may have guessed, the regular charts that we are generally used to – like the
column chart, pie chart, area chart etc does not work for technical analysis. The only
exception to this is the line chart.
The regular charts don’t work mainly because they display one data point at a given
point in time. However Technical Analysis requires four data points to be displayed
at the same time.
Below are some of the chart types:
1. Line chart
2. Bar Chart

9

3. Japanese Candlestick
The focus of this module will be on the Japanese Candlesticks however before we
get to candlesticks, we will understand why we don’t use the line and bar chart.

3.2 – The Line and Bar chart
The line chart is the most basic chart type and it uses only one data point to form
the chart. When it comes to technical analysis, a line chart is formed by plotting the
closing prices of a stock or an index. A dot is placed for each closing price and the
various dots are then connected by a line.
If we are looking 60 day data then the line chart is formed by connecting the dots of
the closing prices for 60 days.

The line charts can be plotted for various time frames namely monthly, weekly,
hourly etc. So ,if you wish to draw a weekly line chart, you can use weekly closing
prices of securities and likewise for the other time frames as well.
The advantage of the line chart is its simplicity. With one glance, the trader can
identify the generic trend of the security. However the disadvantage of the line chart
is also its simplicity. Besides giving the analysts a view on the trend, the line chart
does not provide any additional detail. Plus the line chart takes into consideration
only the closing prices ignoring the open, high and low. For this reason traders
prefer not to use the line charts.
The bar chart on the other hand is a bit more versatile. A bar chart displays all the
four price variables namely open, high, low, and close. A bar has three components.
1. The central line – The top of the bar indicates the highest price the security has
reached. The bottom end of the bar indicates the lowest price for the same period.
2. The left mark/tick – indicates the open
3. The right mark/tick – indicates the close

10

For example assume the OHLC data for a stock as follows:
Open – 65
High – 70
Low – 60
Close – 68
For the above data, the bar chart would look like this:

As you can see, in a single bar, we can plot four different price points. If you wish to
view 5 days chart, as you would imagine we will have 5 vertical bars. So on and so
forth.

Note the position of the left and right mark on the bar chart varies based on how
the market has moved for the given day.
If the left mark, which represents the opening price is placed lower than the right
mark, it indicates that the close is higher than the open (close > open), hence a
positive day for the markets. For example consider this: O = 46, H = 51, L = 45, C =
49. To indicate it is a bullish day, the bar is represented in blue color.

11

Likewise if the left mark is placed higher than the right mark it indicates that the
close is lower than the open (close <open), hence a negative day for markets. For
example consider this: O = 74, H=76, L=70, C=71. To indicate it is a bearish day, the
bar is represented in red color.

The length of the central line indicates the range for the day. A range can be defined
as the difference between the high and low. Longer the line, bigger the range,
shorter the line, smaller is the range.
While the bar chart displays all the four data points it still lacks a visual appeal. This
is probably the biggest disadvantage of a bar chart. It becomes really hard to spot
potential patterns brewing when one is looking at a bar chart. The complexity
increases when a trader has to analyze multiple charts during the day.
Hence for this reason the traders do not use bar charts. However it is worth
mentioning that there are traders who prefer to use bar charts. But if you are
starting fresh, I would strongly recommend the use of Japanese Candlesticks.
Candlesticks are the default option for the majority in the trading community.

3.3 – History of the Japanese Candlestick
Before we jump in, it is worth spending time to understand in brief the history of
the Japanese Candlesticks. As the name suggests, the candlesticks originated from
Japan. The earliest use of candlesticks dates back to the 18th century by a Japanese
rice merchant named Homma Munehisa.

12

Though the candlesticks have been in existence for a long time in Japan, and are
probably the oldest form of price analysis, the western world traders were clueless
about it. It is believed that sometime around 1980’s a trader named Steve Nison
accidentally discovered candlesticks, and he actually introduced the methodology to
the rest of the world. He authored the first ever book on candlesticks titled
“Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques” which is still a favorite amongst many
traders.
Most of the pattern in candlesticks still retains the Japanese names; thus giving an
oriental feel to technical analysis.

3.4 – Candlestick Anatomy
While in a bar chart the open and the close prices are shown by a tick on the left
and the right sides of the bar respectively, however in a candlestick the open and
close prices are displayed by a rectangular body.
In a candle stick chart, candles can be classified as a bullish or bearish candle
usually represented by blue/green/white and red/black candles respectively.
Needless to say, the colors can be customized to any color of your choice; the
technical analysis software allows you to do this. In this module we have opted for
the blue and red combination to represent bullish and bearish candles respectively.
Let us look at the bullish candle. The candlestick, like a bar chart is made of 3
components.
1. The Central real body – The real body, rectangular in shape connects the opening
and closing price
2. Upper shadow – Connects the high point to the close
3. Lower Shadow – Connects the low point to the open
Have a look at the image below to understand how a bullish candlestick is formed:

This is best understood with an example. Let us assume the prices as follows..

13

Open = 62
High = 70
Low = 58
Close = 67

Likewise, the bearish candle also has 3 components:
1. The Central real body – The real body, rectangular in shape which connects the
opening and closing price. However the opening is at the top end and the closing is
at the bottom end of the rectangle
2. Upper shadow – Connects the high point to the open
3. Lower Shadow – Connects the Low point to the close
This is how a bearish candle would look like:

This is best understood with an example. Let us assume the prices as follows..
Open = 456
High = 470
Low = 420
Close = 435

14

Here is a little exercise to help you understand the candlestick pattern better. Try
and plot the candlesticks for the given data.

Day

Open

High

Low

Close

Day 1

430

444

425

438

Day 2

445

455

438

450

Day 3

445

455

430

437

If you find any difficulty in doing this exercise, feel free to ask your query in the
comments at the end of this chapter.
Once you internalize the way candlesticks are plotted, reading the candlesticks to
identify patterns becomes a lot easier.
This is how the candlestick chart looks like if you were to plot them on a time series.
The blue candle indicates bullishness and red indicates bearishness.

15

Also note, a long bodied candle depicts strong buying or selling activity. A short
bodied candle depicts less trading activity and hence less price movement.
To sum up, candlesticks are easier to interpret in comparison to the bar chart.
Candlesticks help you to quickly visualize the relationship between the open and
close as well as the high and low price points.

3.5 – A note on time frames
A time frame is defined as the time duration during which one chooses to study a
particular chart. Some of the popular time frames that technical analysts use are:
o

Monthly Charts

o

Weekly charts

o

Daily or End of day charts

o

Intraday charts – 30 Mins, 15 mins and 5 minutes
One can customize the time frame as per their requirement. For example a high
frequency trader may want to use a 1 minute chart as opposed to any other time
frame.
Here is a quick note on different types of time frames.

Time
Frame

Open

High

Low

Close

No of Candles

Monthly

The opening
price on the
first day of the
month

Highest price at
which the stock
traded during the
entire month

Lowest price at
which the stock
traded during the
entire month

The closing
price on the
last day of
the month

12 candles for the
entire year

Weekly

Monday’s
Opening Price

Highest price at
which the stock
traded during the
entire week

Lowest price at
The closing
which the stock
price on
traded during the
Friday
entire week

52 candles for the
entire year

Daily or
EOD

Opening price
of the day

Highest price at
which the stock
traded during the
day

Lowest price at
The closing
which the stock
price of the
traded during the
day
entire day

One candle per day,
252 candles for the
entire year

16

Intraday
30
minutes

The opening
price at the
beginning of
the 1st minute

Highest price at
which the stock
traded during the
30 minute
duration

Lowest price at
which the stock
traded during the
30 minute
duration

The closing
price as on
the 30th
minute

Approximately 12
candles per day

Intraday
15
minutes

The opening
price at the
beginning of
the 1st minute

Highest price at
which the stock
traded during the
15 minute
duration

Lowest price at
which the stock
traded during the
15 minute
duration

The closing
price as on
the 15th
minute

25 candles per day

The opening
Intraday 5 price at the
minutes beginning of
the 1st minute

Highest price at
which the stock
traded during the
5 minute
duration

Lowest price at
which the stock
traded during the
5 minute
duration

The closing
price as on
the 5th
minute

75 candles per day

As you can see from the table above as and when the time frame reduces, the
number of candles (data points) increase. Based on the type of trader you are, you
need to take a stand on the time frame you need.
The data can either be information or noise. As a trader, you need to filter
information from noise. For instance a long term investor is better off looking at
weekly or monthly charts as this would provide information. While on the other
hand an intraday trader executing 1 or 2 trades per day is better off looking at end
of day (EOD) or at best 15 mins charts. Likewise for a high frequency trader, a 1
minute charts can convey a lot of information.
So based on your stance as a trader you need to choose a time frame. This is
extremely crucial for your trading success, because a successful trader looks for
information and discards the noise.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. Conventional chart type cannot be used for technical analysis as we need to plot 4
data points simultaneously
2. Line chart can be used to interpret trends but besides that no other information
can be derived

17

3. Bar charts lacks visual appeal and one cannot identify patterns easily. For this
reason bar charts are not very popular
4. There are two types of candlesticks – Bullish candle and Bearish candle. The
structure of the candlestick however remains the same
5. When close > open = It is a Bullish candle. When close < open = It is a Bearish
candle
6. Time frames play a very crucial role in defining the trading success. One has to
choose this carefully
7. The number of candle increases as and when the frequency increases
8. A traders should be in a position to discard noise from relevant information

18

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 4

Getting Started with Candlesticks
112

4.1 – History tends to repeat itself – The big assumption
As mentioned earlier one of the key assumptions in technical analysis is that, we
rely on the fact that the history tends to repeats itself. This probably is one of the
most important assumptions in Technical Analysis.
It would make sense to explore this assumption in greater detail at this juncture as
candlestick patterns are heavily dependent on it.
Assume today, the 7th of July 2014 there are few things happening in a particular
stock. Let us call this factor:
1. Factor 1 – The stock has been falling for the last 4 consecutive trading sessions
2. Factor 2 –Today (7th July 2014) is the 5th session and the stock is falling on relatively
lower volumes
3. Factor 3 – The range in which the stock trades today is quite small compared to the
last four days.
With these factors are playing in the background, let us assume that on the next day
(8th July 2014) the fall in stock gets arrested and in fact the stock rallies towards a
positive close. So, as an outcome of the 3 factors the stock went up on the 6 th day.

19

Time passes and let’s says after a few months, the same set of factors is observed
for 5 consecutive trading sessions. What would you expect for the 6th day?
According to the assumption – History tends to repeat itself. However we need to
make an addendum to this assumption. When a set of factors that has panned out
in the past tends to repeat itself in the future, we expect the same outcome to
occur, as was observed in the past, provided the factors are the same.
Therefore, based on this assumption even this time round we can expect the stock
price to go up on the 6thtrading session.

4.2 – Candlestick patterns and what to expect
The candlesticks are used to identify trading patterns. Patterns in turn help the
technical analyst to set up a trade. The patterns are formed by grouping two or
more candles in a certain sequence. However, sometimes powerful trading signals
can be identified by just single candlestick pattern.
Hence, candlesticks can be broken down into single candlestick pattern and multiple
candlestick patterns.
Under the single candlestick pattern we will be learning the following…
1. Marubozu
1. Bullish Marubozu
2. Bearish Marubozu

2. Doji
3. Spinning Tops
4. Paper umbrella
1. Hammer
2. Hanging man

5. Shooting star
Multiple candlestick patterns are a combination of multiple candles. Under the
multiple candlestick patterns we will learn the following:
1. Engulfing pattern
1. Bullish Engulfing
2. Bearish Engulfing

2. Harami
1. Bullish Harami
2. Bearish Harami

3. Piercing Pattern
4. Dark cloud cover

20

5. Morning Star
6. Evening Star
Of course you must be wondering what these names mean. As I had mentioned in
the previous chapter, some of the patterns retain the original Japanese name.
Candlestick patterns help the trader develop a complete point of view. Each pattern
comes with an in built risk mechanism. Candlesticks gives an insight into both entry
and stop loss price.

4.3 – Few assumptions specific to candlesticks
Before we jump in and start learning about the patterns, there are few more
assumptions that we need to keep in mind. These assumptions are specific to
candlesticks. Do pay a lot of attention to these assumptions as we will keep
referring back to these assumptions quite often later.
At this stage, these assumptions may not be very clear to you. I will explain them in
greater detail as and when we proceed. However, do keep these assumptions in the
back of your mind:
o

Buy strength and sell weakness – Strength is represented by a bullish (blue)
candle and weakness by a bearish (red) candle. Hence whenever you are buying
ensure it is a blue candle day and whenever you are selling, ensure it’s a red candle
day.

o

Be flexible with patterns (quantify and verify) – While the text book definition of
a pattern could state a certain criteria, there could be minor variations to the
pattern owing to market conditions. So one needs to be a bit flexible. However one
needs to be flexible within limits, and hence it is required to always quantify the
flexibility.

o

Look for a prior trend – If you are looking at a bullish pattern, the prior trend
should be bearish and likewise if you are looking for a bearish pattern, the prior
trend should be bullish.
In the next chapter, we will begin with learning about single candlestick patterns.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. History tends to repeat itself – we modified this assumption by adding the factor
angle
2. Candlestick patterns can be broken down into single and multiple candlestick
patterns
3. There are three important assumptions specific to candlestick patterns

21

1. Buy strength and sell weakness
2. Be flexible – quantify and verify
3. Look for a prior trend.

22

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 5

Single Candlestick patterns (Part 1)
355

5.1 – Overview
As the name suggests, a single candlestick pattern is formed by just one candle. So
as you can imagine, the trading signal is generated based on 1 day’s trading action.
The trades based on a single candlestick pattern can be extremely profitable
provided the pattern has been identified and executed correctly.
One needs to pay some attention to the length of the candle while trading based on
candlestick patterns. The length signifies the range for the day. In general, the
longer the candle, the more intense is the buying or selling activity. If the candles
are short, it can be concluded that the trading action was subdued.
The following picture gives a perspective on the long/short – bullish, and bearish
candle.

23

The trades have to be qualified based on the length of the candle as well. One
should avoid trading based on subdued short candles. We will understand this
perspective as and when we learn about specific patterns.

5.2 – The Marubozu
The Marubozu is the first single candlestick pattern that we will understand. The
word Marubozu means “Bald” in Japanese. We will understand the context of the
terminology soon. There are two types of marubozu – the bullish marubozu and the
bearish marubozu.
Before we proceed, let us lay down the three important rules pertaining to
candlesticks. We looked at it in the previous chapter; I’ve reproduced the same for
quick reference:
1. Buy strength and sell weakness
2. Be flexible with patterns (verify and quantify)
3. Look for prior trend
Marubozu is probably the only candlestick pattern which violates rule number 3 i.e
look for prior trend. A Marubuzo can appear anywhere in the chart irrespective of
the prior trend, the trading implication remains the same.
The text book defines Marubozu as a candlestick with no upper and lower shadow
(therefore appearing bald). A Marubuzo has just the real body as shown below.
However there are exceptions to this. We will look into these exceptions shortly.

24

The red candle represents the bearish marubuzo and the blue represents the
bullish marubuzo.

5.3 – Bullish Marubuzo
The absence of the upper and lower shadow in a bullish marubuzo implies that the
low is equal to the open and the high is equal to the close. Hence whenever
the, Open = Low and High = close, a bullish marubuzo is formed.
A bullish marubuzo indicates that there is so much buying interest in the stock that
the market participants were willing to buy the stock at every price point during the
day, so much so that the stock closed near its high point for the day. It does not
matter what the prior trend has been, the action on the marubuzo day suggests that
the sentiment has changed and the stock in now bullish.
The expectation is that with this sudden change in sentiment there is a surge of
bullishness and this bullish sentiment will continue over the next few trading
sessions. Hence a trader should look at buying opportunities with the occurrence of
a bullish marubuzo. The buy price should be around the closing price of the
marubuzo.

25

In the chart above (ACC Limited), the encircled candle is a bullish marubuzo. Notice
the bullish marubuzo candle does not have a visible upper and a lower shadow. The
OHLC data for the candle is: Open = 971.8, High = 1030.2, Low = 970.1, Close =
1028.4
Please notice, as per the text book definition of a marubozu Open = Low, and High
= Close. However in reality there is a minor variation to this definition. The variation
in price is not much when measured in percentage terms, for example the variation
between high and close is 1.8 which as a percentage of high is just 0.17%. This is
where the 2nd rule applies – Be flexible, Quantify and Verify.
With this occurrence of a marubuzo the expectation has turned bullish and hence
one would be a buyer of the stock. The trade setup for this would be as follows:
Buy Price = Around 1028.4 and Stoploss = 970.0
As it is evident, candlestick patterns do not give us a target. However we will address
the issue of setting targets at a later stage in this module.
Having decided to buy the stock, when do we actually buy the stock? The answer to
this depends on your risk appetite. Let us assume there are two types of trader with
different risk profiles – the risk taker and the risk averse.
The risk taker would buy the stock on the same day as the marubozu is being
formed. However the trader needs to validate the occurrence of a marubozu.
Validating is quite simple. Indian markets close at 3:30 PM. So, around 3:20 PM one
needs to check if the current market price (CMP) is approximately equal to the
high price for the day, and the opening price of the day is approximately equal
to the low price the day. If this condition is satisfied, then you know the day is
forming a marubozu and therefore you can buy the stock around the closing price.
It is also very important to note that the risk taker is buying on a bullish/blue candle
day, thereby following rule 1 i.e buy on strength and sell on weakness.

26

The risk averse trader would buy the stock on the next day i.e the day after the
pattern has been formed. However before buying the trader needs to ensure that
the day is a bullish day to comply with the rule number 1. This means the risk averse
buyer can buy the stock only around the close of the day. The disadvantage of
buying the next day is that the buy price is way above the suggested buy price, and
therefore the stoploss is quite deep. However as a trade off the risk averse trader is
buying only after doubly confirming that the bullishness is indeed established.
As per the ACC’s chart above, both the risk taker and the risk averse would have
been profitable in their trades.
Here is another example (Asian Paints Ltd) where both the risk taker, and the risk
averse trader would have been profitable.

Here is an example where the risk averse trader would have benefited :

Notice in the chart above, a bullish marubuzo has been encircled. The risk taker
would have initiated a trade to buy the stock on the same day around the close, only
to book a loss on the next day. However the risk averse would have avoided buying
the stock entirely because the next day happened to be a red candle day. Going by
the rule, we should buy only on a blue candle day and sell on a red candle day.

27

5.4 – The Stoploss on Bullish Marubuzo
What if after buying, the market reverses its direction and the trade goes wrong?
Like I had mentioned earlier, candlestick patterns comes with a inbuilt risk
management mechanism. In case of a bullish marubuzo, the low of the stock acts as
a stoploss. So after you initiate a buy trade , in case the markets moves in the
opposite direction, you should exit the stock if price breaches the low of the
marubuzo.
Here is an example where the bullish marubuzo qualified as a buy for both the risk
averse and the risk taker. The OHLC is : O = 960.2, H = 988.6, L = 959.85, C = 988.5.

But the pattern eventually failed and one would have booked a loss. The stoploss
for this trade would be the low of marubuzo, i.e 959.85.
Booking a loss is a part of the game. Even a seasoned trader goes through this.
However the best part of following the candlestick is that the losses are not allowed
to run indefinitely. There is a clear agenda as to what price one has to get out of a
trade provided the trade starts to move in the opposite direction. In this particular
case booking a loss would have been the most prudent thing to do as the stock
continued to go down.
Of course there could be instances where the stoploss gets triggered and you pull
out of the trade. But the stock could reverse direction and start going up after you
pulled out of the trade. But unfortunately this is also a part of the game and one
cannot really help it. No matter what happens, the trader should stick to the rules
and not find excuses to deviate from it.

28

5.3 – Bearish Marubuzo
Bearish Marubuzo indicates extreme bearishness. Here the open is equal to the
high and close the is equal to low. Open = High, and Close = Low.
A bearish marubuzo indicates that there is so much selling pressure in the stock
that the market participants actually sold at every price point during the day, so
much so that the stock closed near its low point of the day. It does not matter what
the prior trend has been, the action on the marubuzo day suggests that the
sentiment has changed and the stock is now bearish.
The expectation is that this sudden change in sentiment will be carried forward over
the next few trading sessions and hence one should look at shorting opportunities.
The sell price should be around the closing price of the marubuzo.

In the chart above (BPCL Limited), the encircled candle indicates the presence of a
bearish marubuzo. Notice the candle does not have an upper and a lower shadow.
The OHLC data for the candle is as follows:
Open = 355.4, High = 356.0, Low = 341, Close = 341.7
As we had discussed earlier a minor variation between the OHLC figures leading to
small upper and lower shadows is ok as long as it is within a reasonable limit.
The trade on the bearish marubuzo would be to short BPCL approximately at 341.7
with a stoploss at the high point of the candle. In this case the stoploss price is
356.0. Of course at this stage we still haven’t dealt with setting targets, and we will
figure that out much later in this module.

29

Do remember this, once a trade is initiated you should hold on to it until either the
target is hit or the stoploss is breached. If you attempt to do something else before
any one of these event triggers, then most likely your trade could go bust. So staying
on course of the plan is extremely crucial.
Trade can be initiated based on the risk appetite of the person. The risk taker can
initiate a short trade on the same day around the closing. Of course, he has to make
sure that the candle is forming a bearish marubuzo. To do this at 3:20PM the trader
has to confirm if the open is approximately equal to the high and the current
market price is equal to the low price. If the condition is validated, then it is a
bearish marubuzo and hence a short position can be initiated.
If the trader is risk averse, he can wait till the next day’s closing. The short trade will
go through only by 3:20PM next day after ensuring that the day is a red candle day.
This is also to ensure that we comply with 1st rule – Buy strength, and Sell weakness.
In the BPCL chart above, both risk taker and risk averse would have been profitable.
Here is another chart, Cipla Limited, where the bearish marubuzo has been
profitable for both risk taker, and a risk averse trader. Remember these are short
term trades and one needs to be quick in booking profits.

Here is a chart which show bearish marubuzo pattern which would have not worked
out for the risk taker but a risk averse trader would have entirely avoided initiating
the trade, thanks to rule 1.

30

5.4 – The trade trap
Earlier in this chapter we did discuss about the length of the candle. One should
avoid trading during an extremely small (below 1% range) or long candle (above
10% range).
A small candle indicates subdued trading activity and hence it would be difficult to
identify the direction of the trade. On the other hand a long candle indicates
extreme activity. The problem with lengthy candles would be the placement of
stoploss. The stoploss would be deep and in case the trade goes wrong the penalty
to pay would be painful. For this reason, one should avoid trading on candles that
are either too short or too long.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. Remember the rules based on which candlesticks work
2. Marubuzo is the only pattern which violates rule number 3 i.e Look for prior trend
3. A bullish marubuzo indicates bullishness
1. Buy around the closing price of a bullish marubozu
2. Keep the low of the marubuzo as the stoploss

4. A bearish marubuzo indicates bearishness
1. Sell around the closing price of a bearish marubozu
2. Keep the high of the marubuzo as the stoploss

5. An aggressive trader can place the trade on the same day as the pattern forms
6. Risk averse traders can place the trade on the next day after ensuring that it obeys
rule number 1 i.e Buy strength, and Sell weakness
7. An abnormal candle lengths should not be traded
1. Short candle indicates subdued activity
2. Long candle indicates extreme activity, however placing stoploss becomes an issue.

31

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 6

Single Candlestick patterns (Part 2)
136

6.1 – The Spinning Top
The spinning top is a very interesting candlestick. Unlike the Marubuzo, it does not
give the trader a trading signal with specific entry or an exit point. However the
spinning top gives out useful information with regard to the current situation in the
market. The trader can use this information to position himself in the market.
A spinning top looks like the candle shown below. Take a good look at the candle.
What observations do you make with regard to the structure of the candle?

Two things are quite prominent…

32

o

The candles have a small real body

o

The upper and lower shadow are almost equal
What do you think would have transpired during the day that leads to the creation
of a spinning top? On the face of it, the spinning top looks like a humble candle with
a small real body, but in reality there were a few dramatic events which took place
during the day.
Let us follow these events:

1. Small real body – This indicates that the open price and close price are quite close
to each other. For instance the open could be 210 and the close could be 213. Or
the open could be 210 and close at 207. Both these situations lead to the creation of
a small real body because a 3 point move on a 200 Rupee stock is not much.
Because the open and close price points are nearby to one another, the color of the
candle does not really matter. It could be a blue or a red candle, what really matters
is the fact that the open prices and close prices are near to one another.
2. The upper shadow – The upper shadow connects the real body to the high point of
the day. If it is a red candle, the high and open are connected. If it is blue candle, the
high and close are connected. If you think about the real body in conjunction with
the upper shadow ignoring the lower shadow what do you think had happened?
The presence of the upper shadow tells us that the bulls did attempt to take the
market higher. However they were not really successful in their endeavor. If the
bulls were truly successful, then the real body would have been a long blue candle
and not really a short candle. Hence this can be treated as an attempt by the bulls
to take the markets higher but they were not really successful at it.
3. The lower shadow – The lower shadow connects the real body to the low point of
the day. If it is a red candle, the low and close are connected. If it is a blue candle,
the low and open are connected. If you think about the real body in conjunction
with the lower shadow ignoring the upper shadow what do you think had
happened? This is pretty much the same thing that happened with the bulls. The
presence of the lower shadow tells us that the bears did attempt to take the market
lower. However they were not really successful in their endeavor. If the bears were
truly successful, then the real body would have been long red candle and not really
a short candle. Hence this can be treated as an attempt by the bears to take the
markets lower but they were not really successful.
Now think about the spinning top as a whole along with all its components i.e real
body, upper shadow, and lower shadow. The bulls made a futile attempt to take the
market higher. The bears tried to take the markets lower and it did not work either.
Neither the bulls nor the bears were able to establish any influence on the market
as this is evident with the small real body. Thus Spinning tops are indicative of a
market where indecision and uncertainty prevails.
If you look at a spinning top in isolation it does not mean much. It just conveys
indecision as both bulls and bears were not able to influence the

33

markets. However when you see the spinning top with respect to the trend in the
chart it gives out a really powerful message based on which you can position your
stance in the markets.

6.2 – Spinning tops in a downtrend
What if the spinning tops were to occur when the stock is in a down trend?
In a down trend, the bears are in absolute control as they manage to grind the
prices lower. With the spinning top in the down trend the bears could be
consolidating their position before resuming another bout of selling. Also, the bulls
have attempted to arrest the price fall and have tried to hold on to their position,
though not successfully. After all, if they were successful the day would have
resulted in a good blue candle and not really a spinning top.
So what stance would you take considering that there are spinning tops in a down
trend. The stance depends on what we expect going forward. Clearly there are two
foreseeable situations with an equal probability:
1. Either there will be another round of selling
2. Or the markets could reverse its directions and the prices could increase
Clearly, with no clarity on what is likely to happen, the trader needs to be prepared
for both the situations i.e reversal and continuation.
If the trader has been waiting for an opportunity to go long on the stock, probably
this could be his opportunity to do so. However to play safe he could test the waters
with only half the quantity. If the trader wants to buy 500 shares, he could probably
enter the trade with 250 shares and could wait and watch the market. If the market
reverses its direction, and the prices indeed start going up then the trader can
average up by buying again. If the prices reverse; most likely the trader would have
bought the stocks at the lowest prices.
If the stock starts to fall, the trader can exit the trade and book a loss. At least the
loss is just on half the quantity and not really on the entire quantity.
Here is a chart, which shows the downtrend followed by a set of spinning tops. The
stock rallied post the occurrence of the spinning top.

34

Here is another chart which shows the continuation of a down trend after the
occurrence of spinning tops.

So, think about the spinning top as “The calm before the storm”. The storm could be
in the form of a continuation or a reversal of the trend. In which way the price will
eventually move is not certain, however what is certain is the movement itself. One
needs to be prepared for both the situations.

6.2 – Spinning tops in an uptrend
A spinning top in an uptrend has similar implications as the spinning top in a down
trend, except that we look at it slightly differently. Look at the chart below, what can
you see and what would be the inference?

35

An obvious observation is the fact that there is an uptrend in the market, which
implies the bulls have been in absolute control over the last few trading sessions.
However with the occurrence of the recent spinning tops the situation is a bit tricky:
1. The bulls are no longer in control, if they were, spinning tops would not be form on
the charts
2. With the formation of spinning tops, the bears have made an entry to the markets.
Though not successful, but the emphasis is on the fact that the bulls gave a leeway
to bears
Having observed the above, what does it actually mean and how do you position
yourself in the market?
1. The spinning top basically conveys indecision in the market i.e neither the bulls nor
the bears are able to influence the markets.
2. Placing the above fact in the context of an uptrend we can conclude two things..
1. The bulls could be consolidating their position before initiating another leg of up move
2. Or the bulls are fatigued and may give way to bears. Hence a correction could be around the
corner.
3. The chances of both these events taking place is equal i.e 50%

Having said that, what should you do? The chances of both events playing out are
equal, how are you going to take a stance? Well, in such a situation you should
prepare for both the outcomes!
Assume you had bought the stock before the rally started; this could be your chance
to book some profits. However, you do not book profits on the entire quantity.
Assume you own 500 shares; you can use this opportunity to book profits on 50% of
your holding i.e 250 shares. Two things can happen after you do this:
1. The bears make an entry – When this happens the market starts to slide down, and
as you have booked 50% profits at a higher price, and can now choose to book

36

profits on the balance 50% as well. Your net selling price will anyway be higher than
the current market price.
2. The bulls make an entry – It turns out that the bulls were indeed taking a pause and
the rally continues, at least you are not completely out of the market as you still
have the balance 50% of your holdings invested in the markets
The stance you take helps you tackle both the outcomes.
Here is a chart which shows an uptrend and after the occurrence of spinning tops,
the stock rallied. By being invested 50%, you can continue to ride the rally.

To sum up, the spinning top candle shows confusion and indecision in the market
with an equal probability of reversal or continuation. Until the situation becomes
clear the traders should be cautious and they should minimize their position size.

6.3 – The Dojis
The Doji’s are very similar to the spinning tops, except that it does not have a real
body at all. This means the open and close prices are equal. Doji’s provide crucial
information about the market sentiments and is an important candlestick pattern.

37

The classic definition of a doji suggests that the open price should be equal to the
close price with virtually a non existant real body. The upper and lower wicks can be
of any length.
However keeping in mind the 2nd rule i.e ‘be flexible, verify and quantify’ even if there
is a wafer thin body, the candle can be considered as a doji.
Obviously the color of the candle does not matter in case of a wafer thin real body.
What matters is the fact that the open and close prices were very close to each
other.
The Dojis have similar implications as the spinning top. Whatever we learnt for
spinning tops applies to Dojis as well. In fact more often than not, the dojis and
spinning tops appear in a cluster indicating indecision in the market.
Have a look at the chart below, where the dojis appear in a downtrend indicating
indecision in the market before the next big move.

Here is another chart where the doji appears after a healthy up trend after which
the market reverses its direction and corrects.

38

So the next time you see either a Spinning top or a Doji individually or in a cluster,
remember there is indecision is the market. The market could swing either ways
and you need to build a stance that adapts to the expected movement in the
market.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. A spinning top has a small real body. The upper and lower shadows are almost
equal in length
2. The colour of the spinning top does not matter. What matters is the fact that the
open and close prices are very close to each other
3. Spinning tops conveys indecision in the market with both bulls and bears being in
equal control
4. Spinning top at the top end of the rally indicates that either the bulls are taking a
pause before they can resume the uptrend further or the bears are preparing to
break the trend. In either case, the trader’s stance has to be cautious. If the trader’s
intent is to buy, he is better off buying only half the quantity and he should wait for
the markets to move in his direction
5. Spinning top at the bottom end of the rally indicates that either the bears are taking
a pause before they can resume the down trend further or the bulls are preparing
to break the trend and take the markets higher. Either case, the trader’s stance has
to be cautious. If the traders intent is to buy, he is better off buying only half the
quantity and he should wait for the markets to make the move
6. Doji’s are very similar to spinning tops. Doji also convey indecision in the market. By
definition dojis do not have a real body. However in reality, even if a wafer thin body
appears it is acceptable
7. A trader’s stance based on dojis is similar to stance taken when a spinning top
occurs.

39

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 7

Single Candlestick patterns (Part 3)
292

7.1 – Paper Umbrella
The paper umbrella is a single candlestick pattern which helps traders in setting up
directional trades. The interpretation of the paper umbrella changes based on
where it appears on the chart.

A paper umbrella consists of two trend reversal patterns namely the hanging man
and the hammer. The hanging man pattern is bearish and the hammer pattern is
relatively bullish. A paper umbrella is characterized by a long lower shadow with a
small upper body.

40

If the paper umbrella appears at the bottom end of a downward rally, it is called
the ‘Hammer’.
If the paper umbrella appears at the top end of an uptrend rally, it is called
the ‘Hanging man’.
To qualify a candle as a paper umbrella, the length of the lower shadow should be
at least twice the length of the real body. This is called the ‘shadow to real body
ratio’.
Let us look at this example: Open = 100, High = 103, Low = 94, Close = 102 (bullish
candle).
Here, the length of the real body is Close – Open i.e 102-100 = 2 and the length of
the lower shadow is Open – Low i.e 100 – 94 = 6. As the length of the lower shadow
is more than twice of the length of the real body; hence we can conclude that a
paper umbrella has formed.

7.2 – The Hammer formation
The bullish hammer is a significant candlestick pattern that occurs at the bottom of
the trend. A hammer consists of a small real body at the upper end of the trading
range with a long lower shadow. The longer the lower shadow the more bullish the
pattern.
The chart below shows the presence of two hammers formed at the bottom of a
down trend.

Notice the blue hammer has a very tiny upper shadow, which is acceptable
considering the “Be flexible – quantify and verify” rule.
A hammer can be of any color as it does not really matter as long as it qualifies ‘the
shadow to real body’ ratio. However, it is slightly more comforting to see a blue
colored real body.
The prior trend for the hammer should be a down trend. The prior trend is
highlighted with the curved line. The thought process behind a hammer is as
follows:

41

1. The market is in a down trend, where the bears are in absolute control of the
markets
2. During a downtrend, every day the market would open lower compared to the
previous day’s close and again closes lower to form a new low
3. On the day the hammer pattern forms, the market as expected trades lower, and
makes a new low
4. However at the low point, there is some amount of buying interest that emerges,
which pushes the prices higher to the extent that the stock closes near the high
point of the day
5. The price action on the hammer formation day indicates that the bulls attempted to
break the prices from falling further, and were reasonably successful
6. This action by the bulls has the potential to change the sentiment in the stock,
hence one should look at buying opportunities
The trade setup for the hammer is as follows:
1. A hammer formation suggests a long trade
2. The trader’s entry time depends on the risk appetite of the trader. If the trader is a
risk taker, he can buy the stock the same day. Remember, the color of the real body
in hammer does not matter; hence there is no violation to the Rule 1. If the trader is
risk averse, he can buy the stock the day after the pattern has formed only after
ensuring that the day is a blue candle day
1. Risk takers can qualify the day as a hammer by checking the following condition at
3:20PM on the hammer day..
1. Open and close should be almost the same (within 1-2% range)
2. Lower shadow length should be at least twice the length of real body
3. If both these conditions are met, then the pattern is a hammer and the risk taker
can go long
2. The risk averse trader should evaluate the OHLC data on the 2 nd If it’s a blue candle,
the trade is valid and hence he can go long
3. The low of the hammer acts as the stoploss for the trade
The chart below shows the formation of a hammer where both the risk taker and
the risk averse would have set up a profitable trade. This is a 15 minutes intraday
chart of Cipla Ltd.

42

The trade set up would be as follows:
Buy Price for a risk taker – He takes the trade on the Hammer candle itself at –
Rs.444/Buy price for a risk averse – He takes the trade on the next candle after evaluating
that the candle is blue at – Rs. 445.4/Stoploss for both the traders is at Rs.441.5/-, which is the low of the hammer
formation.
Do notice how the trade has evolved, yielding a desirable intraday profit.
Here is another chart where the risk averse trader would have benefited by virtue of
the ‘Buy strength and Sell weakness’ rule.

Here is another interesting chart with two hammer formation.

43

Both the hammers qualified on the pre conditions of a hammer i.e :
1. Prior trend to be a down trend
2. Shadow to real body ratio
On the first hammer, the risk averse trader would have saved himself from a loss
making trade, thanks to Rule 1 of candlesticks. However, the second hammer would
have enticed both the risk averse and risk taker to enter a trade. After initiating the
trade, the stock did not move up, it stayed nearly flat and cracked down eventually.
Please note once you initiate the trade you stay in it until either the stop loss or the
target is reached. You should not tweak the trade until one of these events occurs.
The loss in this particular trade (first hammer) is inevitable. But remember this is a
calculated risk and not a mere speculative risk.
Here is another chart where a perfect hammer appears, however it does not satisfy
the prior trend condition and hence it is not defined pattern.

7.3 – The Hanging man
If a paper umbrella appears at the top end of a trend, it is called a Hanging man. The
bearish hanging man is a single candlestick, and a top reversal pattern. A hanging
man signals a market high. The hanging man is classified as a hanging man only if
is preceded by an uptrend. Since the hanging man is seen after a high, the
bearish hanging man pattern signals selling pressure.

44

A hanging man can be of any color and it does not really matter as long as it
qualifies ‘the shadow to real body’ ratio. The prior trend for the hanging man should
be an uptrend, as highlighted by the curved line in the chart above. The thought
process behind a hanging man is as follows:
1. The market is in an uptrend, hence the bulls are in absolute control
2. The market is characterized by new highs and higher lows
3. The day the hanging man pattern appears, the bears have managed to make an
entry
4. This is emphasized by a long lower shadow of the hanging man
5. The entry of bears signifies that they are trying to break the strong hold of the bulls
Thus, the hanging man makes a case for shorting the stock. The trade set up would
be as follows:
1. For the risk taker, a short trade can be initiated the same day around the closing
price
2. For the risk averse, a short trade can be initiated at the close of the next day after
ensuring that a red candle would appear
1. The method to validate the candle for the risk averse, and risk taker is exactly the
same as explained in the case of a hammer pattern
Once the short has been initiated, the high of the candle works as a stoploss for the
trade.

45

In the chart above, BPCL Limited has formed a hanging man at 593. The OHLC
details are –
Open = 592, High = 593.75, Low = 587, Close = 593. Based on this, the trade set up
would be as follows:
o

The risk taker, initiates the short trade on the day the pattern appears (at 593)

o

The risk averse, initiates the short trade on the next day at closing prices after
ensuring it is a red candle day

o

Both the risk taker and the risk averse would have initiated their respective trades

o

The stoploss price for this trade would be the high price i.e above 593.75
The trade would have been profitable for both the risk types.

7.4 –My experience with a paper umbrella
While both the hammer and the hanging man are valid candlestick patterns, my
dependence on a hammer is a little more as opposed to a hanging man. All else
equal, if there were two trading opportunities in the market, one based on hammer
and the other based on hanging man I would prefer to place my money on hammer.
The reason to do so is simply based on my experience in trading with both the
patterns.
My only concern with a hanging man is the fact that if the bears were indeed
influential during the day, why did the price go up after making a low? This
according to me re establishes the bull’s supremacy in the market.
I would encourage you to develop your own thesis based on observations that you
make in the markets. This will not only help you calibrate your trade more
accurately but also help you develop structured market thinking.

46

7.5 – The shooting star
The shooting star is the last single candlestick pattern that we will learn about
before we move to multiple candlestick patterns. The price action on the shooting
star is quite powerful, thus making the shooting star a very popular candlestick
pattern to trade.
The shooting star looks just like an inverted paper umbrella.

Unlike a paper umbrella, the shooting star does not have a long lower shadow.
Instead it has a long upper shadow where the length of the shadow is at least twice
the length of the real body. The colour of the body does not matter, but the pattern
is slightly more reliable if the real body is red. The longer the upper wick, the more
bearish is the pattern. The small real body is a common feature between the
shooting star and the paper umbrella. Going by the text book definition, the
shooting star should not have a lower shadow, however a small lower shadow, as
seen in the chart above is considered alright. The shooting star is a bearish
pattern; hence the prior trend should be bullish.
The thought process behind the shooting star is as follows:
o

The stock is in an uptrend implying that the bulls are in absolute control. When bulls
are in control, the stock or the market tends to make a new high and higher low

o

On the day the shooting star pattern forms, the market as expected trades higher,
and in the process makes a new high

47

o

However at the high point of the day, there is a selling pressure to an extent where
the stock price recedes to close near the low point of the day, thus forming a
shooting star

o

The selling indicates that the bears have made an entry, and they were actually
quite successful in pushing the prices down. This is evident by the long upper
shadow

o

The expectation is that the bears will continue selling over the next few trading
sessions, hence the traders should look for shorting opportunities
Take a look at this chart where a shooting star has been formed right at the top of
an uptrend.

The OHLC data on the shooting star is; open = 1426, high = 1453, low = 1410, close =
1417. The short trade set up on this would be:
1. The risk taker will initiate the trade at 1417, basically on the same day the shooting
star forms
1. The risk taker initiates the trade the same day after ensuring that the day has
formed a shooting star. To confirm this the trader has to validate:
1. If the current market price is more or less equal to the low price
2. The length of the upper shadow is at least twice the length of the real body
2. The risk averse will initiate the trade on the next day, only after ensuring that the
2nd day a red candle has formed
2. Once the trade has been initiated, the stoploss is to be placed at the high of the
pattern. In the case the stop loss is at 1453
As we have discussed this before, once a trade has been set up, we should wait for
either the stoploss or the target to be triggered. It is advisable not to do anything
else, except for maybe trailing your stoploss. Of course, we still haven’t discussed
about trailing stoploss yet. We will discuss it at later stage.

48

Here is a chart where both the risk taker and the risk averse would have made a
remarkable profit on a trade based on shooting star.

Here is an example, where both the risk averse and the risk taker would have
initiated the trade based on a shooting star. However the stoploss has been
breached. Do remember, when the stop loss triggers, the trader will have to exit the
trade, as the trade no longer stands valid. More often than not exiting the trade is
the best thing to do when the stoploss triggers.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. A paper umbrella has a long lower shadow and a small real body. The lower shadow
and the real body should maintain the ‘shadow to real body’ ratio. In case of the
paper umbrella the lower shadow should be at least twice the length of the real
body

49

2. Since the open and close prices are close to each other, the color of the paper
umbrella should not matter
3. If a paper umbrella appears at the bottom of a down trend, it is called the ‘hammer’
4. If the paper umbrella appears at the top end of an uptrend, it is called the hanging
man
5. The hammer is a bullish pattern and one should look at buying opportunities when
it appears
6. The low of the hammer acts as the stop loss price trade
7. The hanging man is a bearish pattern which appears at the top end of the trend,
one should look at selling opportunities when it appears
8. The high of the hanging man acts as the stop loss price for the trade
9. The shooting star is a bearish pattern which appears at the top end of the trend.
One should look at shorting opportunities when a shooting star appears
10. The high of the shooting star will be the stop loss price for the trade.

50

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 8

Multiple candlestick patterns (Part 1)
360

8.1 – The Engulfing Pattern
In a single candlestick pattern, the trader needed just one candlestick to identify a
trading opportunity. However when analyzing multiple candlestick patterns, the
trader needs 2 or sometimes 3 candlesticks to identify a trading opportunity. This
means the trading opportunity evolves over a minimum of 2 trading sessions.
The engulfing pattern is the first multiple candlestick pattern that we need to look
into. The engulfing pattern needs 2 trading sessions to evolve. In a typical engulfing
pattern, you will find a small candle on day 1 and a relatively long candle on day 2
which appears as if it engulfs the candle on day 1. If the engulfing pattern appears
at the bottom of the trend, it is called the “Bullish Engulfing” pattern. If the engulfing
pattern appears at the top end of the trend, it is called the “Bearish Engulfing”
pattern.

8.2 – The Bullish Engulfing Pattern
The bullish engulfing pattern is a two candlestick pattern which appears at the
bottom of the down trend. As the name suggests, this is a bullish pattern which
prompts the trader to go long. The two day bullish engulfing pattern is encircled in
the chart below. The prerequisites for the pattern are as follows:

51

1. The prior trend should be a downtrend
2. The first day of the pattern (P1) should be a red candle reconfirming the
bearishness in the market
3. The candle on the 2nd day of pattern (P2) should be a blue candle, long enough to
engulf the red candle

The thought process behind the bullish engulfing pattern is as follows:
1. The market is in down trend with prices steadily moving down
2. On the first day of the pattern (P1), the market opens low and makes a new low.
This forms a red candle in the process
3. On the second day of the pattern (P2), the stock opens near the closing prices of P1,
and attempts to make a new low. However, at this low point of the day there is a
sudden buying interest, which drives the prices to close higher than the previous
day’s open. This price action forms a blue candle
4. The price action on P2 also suggests that bulls made a very sudden and strong
attempt to break the bearish trend and they did so quite successfully. This is evident
by the long blue candle on P2
5. The bears would not have expected the bull’s sudden action on P2 and hence the
bull’s action kind of rattles the bears causing them some amount of nervousness
6. The bullishness is expected to continue over the next few successive trading
sessions, driving the prices higher and hence the trader should look for buying
opportunities
The trade set up for the bullish engulfing pattern is as follows:
1. The bullish engulfing pattern evolves over two days
2. The suggested buy price is around the close price of blue candle i.e on P2
o

Risk taker initiates the trade on P2 itself after ensuring P2 is engulfing P1

o

The risk averse initiates the trade on the next day i.e the day after P2 around the
closing price, after confirming the day is forming a blue candle

52

o

If the day after P2 is a red candle day, the risk averse trader will ignore the trade,
owing to rule 1 of candlesticks (Buy strength and Sell weakness)

o

On a personal note, in multiple candlestick patterns where the trade evolves over 2
or more days it is worth to be a risk taker as opposed to a risk averse trader

3. The stop loss for the trade would be at the lowest low between P1, and P2
Needless to say, once the trade has been initiated you will have to wait until the
target has been hit or the stoploss has been breached. Of course, one can always
trail the stop loss to lock in profits.
Have a look at DLF’s chart below; the bullish engulfing pattern is encircled.

The OHLC on P1 – Open = 163, High = 168, Low = 158.5, Close = 160. On P2 the
OHLC details are – Open = 159.5, High = 170.2, Low = 159, Close = 169.
The trade set up for the bullish engulfing pattern is as follows:
1. The risk taker would go long on P2 at 169. He can do this by validating P2 as an
engulfing pattern. To validate P2 as an engulfing patterns there are 2 conditions:
o

One, the current market price at 3:20PM on P2 should be higher than P1’s open.

o

Second, the open on P2 should be equal to or lower than P1’s close

2. The risk averse will initiate the trade, the day after P2 only after ensuring that the
day is a blue candle day. So if the P1 falls on a Monday, the risk averse would be
initiating the trade on Wednesday, around 3:20 PM. However, as I had mentioned
earlier, while trading based on multiple candlestick pattern, it may be worth
initiating the trade on pattern completion day itself i.e P2
3. The stop loss on this trade will be the lowest low between P1 and P2. In this
example, lowest low falls on P1 at 158.5
In this example, both the risk averse and the risk taker would have been profitable.
Here is an example of a perfect bullish engulfing pattern formed on Cipla Ltd, the
risk averse trader would have completely missed out a great trading opportunity.

53

There is often a lot of confusion on whether the candle should engulf just the real
body or the whole candle, including the lower and upper shadows. In my personal
experience, as long as the real bodies are engulfed, I would be happy to classify the
candle as a bullish engulfing pattern. Of course, candlestick sticklers would object to
this but what really matters is how well you hone your skills in trading with a
particular candlestick pattern.
So going by that thought, I’d be happy to classify the following pattern as a bullish
engulfing pattern, even though the shadows are not engulfed.

8.3 – The bearish engulfing pattern
The bearish engulfing pattern is a two candlestick pattern which appears at the top
end of the trend, thus making it a bearish pattern. The thought process remains
very similar to the bullish engulfing pattern, except one has to think about it from a
shorting perspective.

54

Take a look at the chart below, the two candles that make up the bearish engulfing
pattern is encircled. You will notice:

1. To begin with the bulls are in absolute control pushing the prices higher
2. On P1, as expected the market moves up and makes a new high, reconfirming a
bullish trend in the market
3. On P2, as expected the market opens higher and attempts to make a new high.
However at this high point selling pressure starts. This selling comes unexpected
and hence tends to displace the bulls
4. The sellers push the prices lower, so much so that the stock closes below the
previous day’s (P1) open. This creates nervousness amongst the bulls
5. The strong sell on P2 indicates that the bears may have successfully broken down
the bull’s stronghold and the market may continue to witness selling pressure over
the next few days
6. The idea is to short the index or the stock in order to capitalize on the expected
downward slide in prices
The trade set up would be as follows:
1. The bearish engulfing pattern suggests a short trade
2. The risk taker initiates the trade on the same day after validating two conditions
o

The open on P2 is higher than P1’s close

o

The current market price at 3:20 PM on P2 is lower than P1’s open price. If the two
conditions are satisfied, then it would be logical to conclude that it is a bearish
engulfing pattern

3. The risk averse will initiate the trade on the day after P2 only after ensuring that the
day is a red candle day
4. Since the bearish engulfing pattern is a 2 day pattern, it makes sense to be a risk
taker. However this purely depends on the individual’s risk appetite

55

Take a look at the chart below of Ambuja Cements. There are two bearish engulfing
patterns formed. The first pattern on the chart (encircled, starting from left) did not
work in favor of a risk taker. However the risk averse would have completely
avoided taking the trade. The second bearish engulfing pattern would have been
profitable for both the risk taker and the risk averse.

The OHLC data for the bearing engulfing pattern (encircled at the top end of the
chart) is as below:
P1: Open – 214, High – 220, Low – 213.3, Close – 218.75
P2: Open – 220, High – 221, Low – 207.3, Close – 209.4
The trade setup for the short trade, based on the bearish engulfing pattern is as
follows:
1. On P2 by 3:20 PM the risk taker would initiate the short trade at 209 after ensuring
P1, and P2 together form a bearish engulfing pattern
2. The risk averse will initiate the trade, the day after P2 only after ensuring that the
day is a red candle day
3. The stoploss in both the cases will the highest high of P1 and P2, which in this case
is at 221.
Both the risk averse and the risk taker would have been profitable in this particular
case.

8.4 – The presence of a doji
Now here is a very interesting chart. From my own personal experience I can tell
you, charts like the one shown below are highly profitable. One should not miss
such trading opportunities
Take a look at the chart, what are the things that catch your attention?
1. An obvious uptrend as highlighted

56

2. A bearish engulfing pattern right at the top end of the upward rally
3. A doji formation on the day following P2
What implication would a doji have in this chart?

Let us inspect this chart event by event:
1. A prolonged uptrend in the chart confirms the bulls are in absolute control
2. On P1 a blue candle is formed, reconfirming the bull’s dominance in the markets
3. On P2 markets open higher and make a new high comforting the bulls. However at
the high point a strong surge to sell builds up, to an extent that the prices closes
below P1’s opening prices
4. This trading action on P2 sets in a bit of panic to bulls, but they are not shaken yet
5. On day 3, let us call it as P3, though the opening is weak it is not much lower
compared to P2’s close. This is not too comforting for the bulls, as they expect the
markets to be stronger.
6. During P3 the market attempts to move higher (Doji’s upper shadow) however the
high is not sustained. Even the low is not sustained and eventually the day closes
flat forming a Doji. As you may recall, Dojis indicate indecision in the market
7. On P2 bulls panicked and on P3 bulls were uncertain
8. Panic with uncertainty is the perfect recipe for a catastrophe. Which explains the
long red candle following the Doji
From my own personal trading experience I can tell you that whenever a doji follows
a recognizable candlestick pattern, the opportunity created is bigger. Besides
illustrating this point, I also want to draw your attention to chart analysis
methodology. Notice in this particular chart, we did not just look at what was
happening on P1 or P2 but we went beyond that and actually combined two
different patterns to develop a comprehensive view on the market.

57

8.5 – The Piercing Pattern
The piercing pattern is very similar to the bullish engulfing pattern with a very minor
variation. In a bullish engulfing pattern the P2’s blue candle engulfs P1’s red candle
completely. However in a piercing pattern P2’s blue candle partially engulfs P1’s red
candle, however the engulfing should be between 50% and less than 100%. You can
validate this visually or calculate the same. For example if P1’s range (Open – Close)
is 12 , P2’s range should be at least 6 or higher but below 12.

As long as this condition is satisfied, everything else is similar to the bullish
engulfing including the trade set up. Here a risk taker would initiate the trade on P2
around the close. The risk averse would initiate the trade, the day after P2 only after
ensuring a blue candle is formed. The stoploss would be the low of the pattern.
Have a look at the following chart:

Here P2’s blue candle engulfs just under 50% of P1’s red candle. For this reason we
do not consider this as a piercing pattern.

58

8.6 – The Dark Cloud Cover
The dark cloud cover is very similar to the bearish engulfing pattern with a minor
variation. In a bearish engulfing pattern the red candle on P2 engulfs P1’s blue
candle completely. However in a dark cloud cover, the red candle on P2 engulfs
about 50 to 100% of P1’s blue candle. The trade set up is exactly the same as the
bearish engulfing pattern. Think about the dark cloud cover as the inverse of a
piercing pattern.

8.7 – A perspective on selecting a trade
Typically stocks in the same sector have similar price movement. For example, think
about TCS and Infosys or ICICI Bank and HDFC bank. Their price movement is similar
because these companies are more or less of the same size, have similar business,
and the same external factors that affect their business. However this does not
mean their stock price movement would match point to point. For example if there
is negative news in the banking sector, banking stocks are bound to fall. In such a
scenario if the stock price of ICICI Bank falls by 2%, it is not really necessary that

59

HDFC Bank’s stock price should also fall exactly 2%. Probably HDFC Bank stock price
may fall by 1.5% or 2.5%. Hence the two stocks may form 2 different (but somewhat
similar) candlestick patterns such as a bearish engulfing and dark cloud cover at the
same time.
Both these are recognisable candlestick patterns but if I were to choose between
the two patterns to set up a trade. I would put my money on the bearish engulfing
pattern as opposed to a dark cloud cover. This is because the bearishness in a
bearish engulfing pattern is more pronounced (due to the fact that it engulfs the
previous day’s entire candle). On the same lines I would choose a bullish engulfing
pattern over a piercing pattern.
However there is an exception to this selection criterion. Later in this module I will
introduce a 6 point trading checklist. A trade should satisfy at least 3 to 4 points on
this checklist for it to be considered as a qualified trade. Keeping this point in
perspective, assume there is a situation where the ICICI Bank stock forms a piercing
pattern and the HDFC Bank stock forms a bullish engulfing pattern. Naturally one
would be tempted to trade the bullish engulfing pattern, however if the HDFC Bank
stock satisfies 3 checklist points, and ICICI Bank stock satisfies 4 checklist points, I
would go ahead with the ICICI Bank stock even though it forms a less convincing
candlestick pattern.
On the other hand, if both the stocks satisfy 4 checklist points I will go ahead with
the HDFC Bank trade.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. Multiple candlestick patterns evolve over two or more trading days
2. The bullish engulfing pattern evolves over two trading days. It appears at the
bottom end of downtrend. Day one is called P1 and day 2 is called P2
3. In a bullish engulfing pattern, P1 is a red candle, and P2 is a blue candle. P2’s blue
candle completely engulfs P1;s red candle
4. A risk taker initiates a long trade at the close of P2 after ensuring P1 and P2 together
form a bullish engulfing pattern. A risk averse trader will initiate the trade the day
after P2, near the close of the day
5. The stoploss for the bullish engulfing pattern is the lowest low between P1 and P2
6. The bearish engulfing pattern appears at the top end of an uptrend. P1’s blue
candle is completely engulfed by P2’s red candle
7. A risk taker initiates a short trade at the close of P2 after ensuring P1 and P2
together form a bearish engulfing pattern. The risk averse trader will initiate the
trade the day after P2, after confirming the day forms a red candle

60

8. The highest high of P1 and P2 forms the stoploss for a bearish engulfing pattern
9. The presence of a doji after an engulfing pattern tends to catalyze the pattern’s
evolution.
10. The piercing pattern works very similar to bullish engulfing pattern, except that P2’s
blue candle engulfs at least 50% and below 100% of P1’s red candle
11. The dark cloud cover works similar to the bearish engulfing pattern, except that P2’s
red candle engulfs at least 50% and below 100% of P1’s blue candle.

61

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 9

Multiple Candlestick Patterns (Part 2)
139

9.1 – The Harami Pattern
Before you get thinking, the word ‘Harami’ does not stand for the word harami used
in Hindi
. Apparently it is old Japanese word for ‘pregnant’. You’d appreciate the
intuitiveness of this word, when you see the candlestick formation.
Harami is a two candle pattern. The first candle is usually long and the second
candle has a small body. The second candle is generally opposite in colour to the
first candle. On the appearance of the harami pattern a trend reversal is possible.
There are two types of harami patterns – the bullish harami and the bearish harami.

9.2 – The Bullish Harami
As the name suggests, the bullish harami is a bullish pattern appearing at the
bottom end of the chart. The bullish harami pattern evolves over a two day period,
similar to the engulfing pattern.
In the chart below, the bullish harami pattern is encircled.

62

The thought process behind a bullish harami pattern is as follows:
1. The market is in a downtrend pushing the prices lower, therefore giving the bears
absolute control over the markets
2. On day 1 of the pattern (P1) a red candle with a new low is formed, reinforcing the
bear’s position in the market
3. On day 2 of the pattern (P2) the market opens at a price higher than the previous
day’s close. On seeing a high opening price the bears panic ,as they would have
otherwise expected a lower opening price
4. The market gains strength on P2 and manages to close on a positive note, thus
forming a blue candle. However P2’s closing price is just below the previous days
(P1) open price
5. The price action on P2 creates a small blue candle which appears contained
(pregnant) within P1’s long red candle
6. The small blue candle on a standalone basis looks harmless, but what really causes
the panic is the fact that the bullish candle appears all of a sudden, when it is least
expected
7. The blue candle not only encourages the bulls to build long positions, but also
unnerves the bears
8. The expectation is that panic amongst the bears will spread in an accelerated
manner, giving a greater push to bulls. This tends to push the prices higher. Hence
one should look at going long on the stock.
The trade setup for the bullish harami is as follows:
1. The idea is to go long on the bullish harami formation
2. Risk takers can initiate a long trade around the close of the P2 candle
3. Risk takers can validate the following conditions to confirm if P1, and P2 together
form a bullish harami pattern:
1. The opening on P2 should be higher than the close of P1
2. The current market price at 3:20 PM on P2 should be less than P1’s opening price

63

3. If both these conditions are satisfied then one can conclude that both P1 and P2
together form a bullish harami pattern
4. The risk averse can initiate a long trade at the close of the day after P2, only after
confirming that the day is forming a blue candle
5. The lowest low of the pattern will be the stoploss for the trade
Here is a chart of Axis Bank; the bullish harami is encircled below:

The OHLC details for the pattern are as follows:
P1 – Open = 868, High = 874, Low = 810, Close = 815
P2 – Open = 824, High = 847, Low = 818, Close = 835
The risk taker would initiate the long position at the close of P2 which is around 835.
The stop loss for the trade would be lowest low price between P1 and P2; which in
this case it is 810.
The risk averse will initiate the trade the day near the close of the day after P2,
provided it is a blue candle day, which in this case is.
Once the trade has been initiated, the trader will have to wait for either the target to
be hit or the stop loss to be triggered.
Here is a chart below where the encircled candles depict a bullish harami pattern,
but it is not. The prior trend should be bearish, but in this case the prior trend is
almost flat which prevents us from classifying this candlestick pattern as a bullish
harami.

64

And here is another example where a bullish harami occurred but the stoploss on
the trade triggered leading to a loss.

9.3 – The bearish harami
The bearish harami pattern appears at the top end of an uptrend which gives the
trader a opportunity to initiate a short trade.

The thought process behind shorting a bearish harami is as follows:

65

1. The market is in an uptrend, placing the bulls in absolute control
2. On P1, the market trades higher, and makes a new high and closes positively
forming a blue candle day. The trading action reconfirms the bulls dominance in the
market
3. On P2 the market unexpectedly opens lower which displaces the bulls ,and sets in a
bit of panic to bulls
4. The market continues to trade lower to an extent where it manages to close
negatively forming a red candle day
5. The unexpected negative drift in the market causes panic making the bulls to
unwind their positions
6. The expectation is that this negative drift is likely to continue and therefore one
should look at setting up a short trade.
The trade setup for the short trade based on bearish harami is as follows:
1. The risk taker will short the market near the close of P2 after ensuring P1 and P2
together forms a bearish harami. To validate this, two conditions must be satisfied:
1. The open price on P2 should be lower than the close price of P1
2. The close price on P2 should be greater than the open price of P1

2. The risk averse will short the market the day after P2 after ensuring it forms a red
candle day
3. The highest high between P1 and P2 acts as the stoploss for the trade.
Here is a chart of IDFC Limited where the bearish engulfing pattern is identified. The
OHLC details are as follows:
P1 – Open = 124, High = 129, Low = 122, Close = 127
P2 – Open = 126.9, High = 129.70, Low, = 125, Close = 124.80

The risk taker will initiate the trade on day 2, near the closing price of 125. The risk
averse will initiate the trade on the day after P2, only after ensuring it forms a red

66

candle day. In the above example, the risk averse would have avoided the trade
completely.
The stop loss for the trade would be the highest high between P1 and P2. In this
case it would be 129.70.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. The harami pattern evolves over 2 trading sessions – P1 and P2.
2. Day 1 (P1) of the pattern forms a long candle and day 2(P2) of the pattern forms a
small candle which appears as if it has been tucked inside the P1’s long candle
3. A bullish harami candle pattern is formed at the lower end of a down trend. P1 is a
long red candle, and P2 is a small blue candle. The idea is to initiate a long trade
near the close of P2 (risk taker). A risk averse trader will initiate the long trade near
the close of the day after P2 only after ensuring it forms a blue candle day
4. The stop loss on a bullish harami pattern is the lowest low price between P1 and P2
5. The bearish harami pattern is formed at the top end of an uptrend. P1 is a long blue
candle, and P2 is a small red candle. The idea is to initiate a short trade near the
close of P2 (risk taker). The risk averse will initiate the short near the close of the day
only after ensuring it is a red candle day
6. The stop loss on a bearish harami pattern is the highest high price between P1 and
P2.

67

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 10

Multiple Candlestick Patterns (Part 3)
292

The morning star and the evening star are the last two candlestick patterns we will
be studying.
Before we understand the morning star pattern, we need to understand two
common price behaviors –gap up opening and gap down opening. Gaps (a general
term used to indicate both gap up and gap down) are a common price behavior. A
gap on a daily chart happens when the stock closes at one price but opens on the
following day at a different price.

10.1 – The Gaps
Gap up opening – A gap up opening indicates buyer’s enthusiasm. Buyers are
willing to buy stocks at a price higher than the previous day’s close. Hence, because
of enthusiastic buyer’s outlook, the stock (or the index) opens directly above the
previous day’s close. For example consider the closing price of ABC Ltd was Rs.100
on Monday. After the market closes on Monday assume ABC Ltd announces their
quarterly results. The numbers are so good that on Tuesday morning the buyers are
willing to buy the stock at any price. This enthusiasm would lead to stock price
jumping to Rs.104 directly. This means though there was no trading activity between
Rs.100 and Rs.104, yet the stock jumped to Rs.104. This is called a gap up
opening. Gap up opening portrays bullish sentiment.
In the following image the green arrows points to a gap up openings.

68

Gap down opening – Similar to gap up opening, a gap down opening shows the
enthusiasm of the bears. The bears are so eager to sell, that they are willing to sell
at a price lower than the previous day’s close. In the example stated above, if the
quarterly results were bad, the sellers would want to get rid of the stock and hence
the market on Tuesday could open directly at Rs.95 instead of Rs.100. In this case,
though there was no trading activity between Rs.100 and Rs.95 yet the stock
plummeted to Rs.95. Gap down opening portrays bearish sentiment. In the
following image the green arrows points to a gap down opening.

10.2 – The Morning Star
The morning star is a bullish candlestick pattern which evolves over a three day
period. It is a downtrend reversal pattern. The pattern is formed by combining 3
consecutive candlesticks. The morning star appears at the bottom end of a down
trend. In the chart below the morning star is encircled.

69

The morning star pattern involves 3 candlesticks sequenced in a particular order.
The pattern is encircled in the chart above. The thought process behind the morning
star is as follow:
1. Market is in a downtrend placing the bears in absolute control. Market makes
successive new lows during this period
2. On day 1 of the pattern (P1), as expected the market makes a new low and forms a
long red candle. The large red candle shows selling acceleration
3. On day 2 of the pattern (P2) the bears show dominance with a gap down opening.
This reaffirms the position of the bears
4. After the gap down opening, nothing much happens during the day (P2) resulting in
either a doji or a spinning top. Note the presence of doji/spinning top represents
indecision in the market
5. The occurrence of a doji/spinning sets in a bit of restlessness within the bears, as
they would have otherwise expected another down day especially in the backdrop
of a promising gap down opening
6. On the third day of the pattern (P3) the market/stock opens with a gap up followed
by a blue candle which manages to close above P1’s red candle opening
7. In the absence of P2’s doji/spinning top it would have appeared as though P1 and
P3 formed a bullish engulfing pattern
8. P3 is where all the action unfolds. On the gap up opening itself the bears would
have been a bit jittery. Encouraged by the gap up opening buying persists through
the day, so much so that it manages to recover all the losses of P1
9. The expectation is that the bullishness on P3 is likely to continue over the next few
trading sessions and hence one should look at buying opportunities in the market
Unlike the single and two candlestick patterns, both the risk taker and the risk
averse trader can initiate the trade on P3 itself. Waiting for a confirmation on the
4th day may not be necessary while trading based on a morning star pattern.
The long trade setup for a morning star would be as follows:
1. Initiate a long trade at the close of P3 (around 3:20PM) after ensuring that P1, P2,
and P3 together form a morning star

70

2. To validate the formation of a morning star on P3 the following conditions should
satisfy:
1. P1 should be a red candle
2. With a gap down opening, P2 should be either a doji or a spinning top
3. P3 opening should be a gap up, plus the current market price at 3:20 PM should be
higher than the opening of P1
3. The lowest low in the pattern would act as a stop loss for the trade

10.3 – The evening star
The evening star is the last candlestick pattern that we would learn in this module.
The evening star is a bearish equivalent of the morning star. The evening star
appears at the top end of an uptrend. Like the morning star, the evening star is a
three candle formation and evolves over three trading sessions.

The reasons to go short on an evening star are as follows:
1. The market is in an uptrend placing the bulls in absolute control
2. During an uptrend the market/stock makes new highs
3. On the first day of the pattern (P1), as expected the market opens high, makes a
new high and closes near the high point of the day. The long blue candle formed on
day 1 (P1) shows buying acceleration
4. On the 2nd day of the pattern (P2) the market opens with a gap reconfirming the
bull’s stance in the market. However after the encouraging open the market/stock
does not move and closes by forming a doji/spinning top. The closing on P2 sets in a
bit of panic for bulls

71

5. On the 3rd day of the pattern (P3), the market opens gap down and progresses into a
red candle. The long red candle indicates that the sellers are taking control. The
price action on P3 sets the bulls in panic
6. The expectation is that the bulls will continue to panic and hence the bearishness
will continue over the next few trading session. Therefore one should look at
shorting opportunities
The trade setup for an evening star is as follows:
1. Short the stock on P3, around the close of 3:20 PM after validating that P1 to P3
form an evening star
2. To validate the evening star formation on day 3, one has to evaluate the following:
1. P1 should be a blue candle
2. P2 should be a doji or a spinning top with a gap up opening
3. P3 should be a red candle with a gap down opening. The current market price at
3:20PM on P3 should be lower than the opening price of P1
3. Both risk taker and risk averse can initiate the trade on P3
4. The stop loss for the trade will be the highest high of P1, P2, and P3.

10.4 – Summarizing the entry and exit for candlestick patterns
Before we conclude this chapter let us summarize the entry and stop loss for both
long and short trades. Remember during the study of candlesticks we have not dealt
with the trade exit (aka targets). We will do so in the next chapter.
Risk taker – The risk taker enters the trade on the last day of the pattern formation
around the closing price (3:20 PM). The trader should validate the pattern rules and
if the rules are validated; then the opportunity qualifies as a trade.
Risk averse – The risk averse trader will initiate the trade after he identifies a
confirmation on the following day. For a long trade the colour of candle should be
blue and for a short trade the color of the candle should be red.
As a rule of thumb, higher the number of days involved in a pattern the better it is
to initiate the trade on the same day.
The stoploss for a long trade is the lowest low of the pattern. The stoploss for a
short trade is the highest high of the pattern.

10.5 – What next?
We have looked at 16 candlestick patterns, and is that all you may wonder?.
No, not really. There are many candlestick patterns and I could go on explaining
these patterns but that would defeat the ultimate goal.

72

The ultimate goal is to understand and recognize the fact that candlesticks are a
way of thinking about the markets. You need not know all the patterns.
Think about car driving, once you learn how to drive a car, it does not matter which
car you drive. Driving a Honda is pretty much the same as driving a Hyundai or Ford.
Driving comes naturally irrespective of which car you are driving. Likewise once you
train your mind to read the thought process behind a candlestick it does not matter
which pattern you see. You will exactly know how to react and how to set up a trade
based on the chart that you are seeing. Of course in order to reach this stage, you
will have to go through the rigor of learning and trading the standard patterns.
So my advice to you would be to know the patterns that we have discussed here.
They are some of the most frequent and profitable patterns to trade on the Indian
markets. As you progress, start developing trades based on the thought process
behind the actions of the bulls and the bears. This, over time is probably the best
approach to study candlesticks.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. Star formation occurs over three trading sessions. The candle of P2 is usually a doji
or a spinning top
2. If there is a doji on P2 in a star pattern, it is called a doji star (morning doji star,
evening doji star) else it is just called the star pattern (morning star, evening star)
3. Morning star is a bullish pattern which occurs at the bottom end of the trend. The
idea is to go long on P3 with the lowest low of the pattern being the stop loss for the
trade
4. Evening star is a bearish pattern, which occurs at the top end of an up trend. The
idea is to go short on P3, with the highest high of the pattern acting as a stop loss
5. The star formation evolves over a 3 days period, hence both the risk averse and risk
taker are advised to initiate the trade on P3
6. Candlesticks portray the traders thought process. One should nurture this thought
process as he dwells deeper into the candlestick study

73

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 11

The Support and Resistance
301

While discussing candlestick patterns, we had learnt about the entry and the
stoploss points, however the target price was not discussed. We will discuss the
same in this chapter.
The best way to identify the target price is to identify the support and the resistance
points. The support and resistance (S&R) are specific price points on a chart which
are expected to attract maximum amount of either buying or selling. The support
price is a price at which one can expect more buyers than sellers. Likewise the
resistance price is a price at which one can expect more sellers than buyers.
On a standalone basis traders can use S&R to identify trade entry points as well.

11.1 – The Resistance
As the name suggests, resistance is something which stops the price from rising
further. The resistance level is a price point on the chart where traders expect
maximum supply (in terms of selling) for the stock/index. The resistance level is
always above the current market price.
The likely hood of the price rising up to the resistance level, consolidating, absorbing
all the supply, and then declining is high. The resistance is one of the critical
technical analysis tool which market participants look at in a rising market. The
resistance often acts as a trigger to sell.
Here is the chart of Ambuja Cements Limited. The horizontal line coinciding at
Rs.215 on chart, marks the resistance level for Ambuja Cements.

74

I have deliberately compressed the chart to include more data points, the reasons
for which I will shortly explain. But before that there are two things that you need to
pay attention to while looking at the above chart:
1. The resistance level, indicated by a horizontal line, is higher than the current market
price.
2. While the resistance level is at 215, the current candle is at 206.75. The current
candle and its corresponding price level are encircled for your reference
For a moment let us imagine Ambuja cements at Rs.206 forming a bullish marubuzo
with a low of 202. We know this is a signal to initiate a long trade, and we also know
that the stoploss for this trade is at 202. With the new found knowledge on
resistance, we now know that we can set 215 as a possible target for this trade!
Why 215 you may wonder? The reasons are simple:1. Resistance of 215 implies there is a likelihood of excess supply
2. Excess supply builds selling pressure
3. Selling pressure tends to drag the prices lower
Hence for reasons stated above, when a trader is long he can look at resistance
points to set targets and to set exit points for the trade.
Also, with the identification of the resistance the long trade can now be completely
designed as follows:
Entry – 206, Stoploss – 202, and Target – 215.
The next obvious question is how do we identify the resistance level? Identifying
price points as either a support or resistance is extremely simple. The identification
process is the same for both support and resistance. If the current market price is
below the identified point, it is called a resistance point; else it is called a support
point.

75

Since the process is the same, let us proceed to understand ‘support’, and we will
follow it up with the procedure to identify S&R.

11.2 – The Support
Having learnt about resistance, understanding the support level should be quite
simple and intuitive. As the name suggests, the support is something that prevents
the price from falling further. The support level is a price point on the chart where
the trader expects maximum demand (in terms of buying) coming into the
stock/index. Whenever the price falls to the support line, it is likely to bounce back.
The support level is always below the current market price.
There is a maximum likely hood that the price could fall till the support, consolidate,
absorb all the demand, and then start to move upwards. The support is one of the
critical technical level market participants look for in a falling market. The support
often acts as a trigger to buy.
Here is the chart of Cipla Limited. The horizontal line coinciding at 435 on chart
marks the support level for Cipla.

Few things that you need to notice on the chart above:

76

1. The support level, indicated by the horizontal line is below the current market price
2. While the support level is at 435, the current candle is at 442.5. The current candle
and its corresponding price level are encircled for your reference
Like we did while understanding resistance, let us imagine a bearish pattern
formation – perhaps a shooting star at 442 with a high of 446. Clearly with a
shooting star, the call is to short Cipla at 442, with 446 as the stoploss. Since we
know 435 the immediate support, we can set the target at 435.
So what makes Rs.435 target worthy? The following reasons back the decision:
1. Support at 435 implies there is a maximum likely hood of excess demand to emerge
2. Excess demand builds buying pressure
3. Buying pressure tends to drag the price higher
Hence for the reasons stated above, when a trader is short, he can look at support
points to set targets and to set exit points for the trade.
Also, with the identification of the support, the short trade is now completely
designed.
Entry – 442, stoploss – 446, and target – 435.

11.3 – Construction/Drawing of the Support and Resistance level
Here is a 4 step guide to help you understand how to identify and construct the
support and the resistance line.
Step 1) Load data points – If the objective is to identify short term S&R load at least
3-6 months of data points. If you want to identify long term S&R, load at least 12 –
18 months of data points. When you load many data points, the chart looks
compressed. This also explains why the above two charts looks squeezed.
1. Long term S&R – is useful for swing trading
2. Short term S&R – is useful intraday and BTST trades
Here is a chart where I have loaded 12 months of data points

77

Step 2) Identify at least 3 price action zones – A price action zone can be
described as ‘sticky points’ on chart where the price has displayed at least one of the
behaviors:
1. Hesitated to move up further after a brief up move
2. Hesitated to move down further after a brief down move
3. Sharp reversals at particular price point
Here are a series of charts that identifies the above 3 points in the same order:
In the chart below, the encircled points indicate the price hesitating to move up
further after a brief up move:

In the chart below, the encircled points indicate the price hesitating to move down
further after a brief down move:

78

In the chart below, the encircled points indicate sharp price reversals:

Step 3) Align the price action zones – When you look at a 12 month chart, it is
common to spot many price action zones. But the trick is to identify at least 3 price
action zones that are at the same price level.
For example here is a chart where two price action zones are identified but they are
not at the same price point.

79

Look at the following chart, I have encircled 3 price action zones that are around the
same price points:

A very important point to note while identifying these price action zones is to make
sure these price zone are well spaced in time. Meaning, if the 1st price action zone is
identified on 2nd week on May, then it will be meaningful to identify the 2nd price
action zone at any point after 4th week of May (well spaced in time). The more
distance between two price action zones, the more powerful is the S&R
identification.
Step 4) Fit a horizontal line – Connect the three price action zones with a
horizontal line. Based on where this line fits in with respect to the current market
price, it either becomes a support or resistance.
Have a look at this chart

Starting from left:
1. The 1st circle highlights a price action zone where there is a sharp reversal of price
2. The 2nd circle highlights a price action zone where price is sticky

80

3. The 3rd circle highlights a price action zone where there is a sharp reversal of price
4. The 4th circle highlights a price action zone where price is sticky
5. The 5th circle highlights the current market price of Cipla – 442.5
In the above chart all the 4 price action zones are around the same price points i.e
at 429. Clearly, the horizontal line is below the current market price of 442.5, thus
making 429 as an immediate support price for Cipla.
Please note, whenever you run a visual exercise in Technical Analysis such as
identifying S&R, you run the risk of approximation. Hence always give room for
error. The price level is usually depicted in a range and not at a single price point. It
is actually a zone or an area that acts as support or resistance.
So going by the above logic, I would be happy to consider a price range around 426
to 432 as a support region for Cipla. There is no specific rule for this range, I just
subtracted and added 3 points to 429 to get my price range for support!
Here is another chart, where both S&R have been identified for Ambuja Cements
Limited.

The current price of Ambuja is 204.1, the support is identified at 201 (below current
market price), and the resistance at 214 (above current market price). So if one were
to short Ambuja at 204, the target, based on support can be at 201. Probably this
would be a good intraday trade. For a trader going long at 204, 214 can be a
reasonable target expectation based on resistance.
Notice in both the support and the resistance level, there at least 3 price action zone
identified at the price level, all of which are well spaced in time.

81

11.4 – Reliability of S&R
The support and resistance lines are only indicative of a possible reversal of prices.
They by no means should be taken for as certain. Like anything else in technical
analysis, one should weigh the possibility of an event occurring (based on patterns)
in terms of probability.
For example, based on the chart of Ambuja Cements –
Current Market Price = 204
Resistance = 214
The expectation here is that if at all Ambuja cements starts to move up it is likely to
face a resistance at 214. Meaning, at 214 sellers could emerge who can potentially
drag the prices lower. What is the guarantee that the sellers would come in at 214?
In other words, what is dependence of the resistance line? Honestly, your guess is
as good as mine.
However, historically it can be seen that whenever Ambuja reached 214, it reacted in
a peculiar way leading to the formation of a price action zone. The comforting factor
here is that the price action zone is well spaced in time. This mean 214 stands as a
time tested price action zone. Therefore keeping the very first rule of technical
analysis in perspective i.e “History tends to repeat itself” we go with the belief
that support and resistance levels will be reasonably honored.
Purely from my personal trading experience well constructed S&R points are usually
well respected.

11.4 – Optimization and checklist
Perhaps, we are now at the most important juncture in this module. We will start
discovering few optimization techniques which will help us identify high quality
trades. Remember, when you seek quality, quantity is always compromised, but this
is a compromise that is worth making. The idea is to identify quality trading signals
as opposed to identifying plenty, but worthless trades.
Optimization in general is a technique wherein you fine tune a process for best
possible results. The process in this context is about identifying trades.
Let us go back to candlesticks patterns, maybe to the very first we learnt – bullish
marubuzo. A bullish marubuzo suggests a long trade near the close of the
marubuzo, with the low of the marubuzo acting as the stoploss.
Assume the following credentials for the bullish marubuzo:
Open = 432, High = 449, Low = 430, Close = 448
Hence the entry for the long trade is approximately at 448, with 430 as the stoploss.

82

Now what if the low of the marubuzo also coincides with a good time tested
support? Do you see a remarkable confluence of two technical theories here?
We have a double confirmation to go long. Think about it on following terms:
1. A recognized candlestick pattern (bullish marubuzo) suggests the trader to initiate a
long trade
2. A support near the stoploss price suggests the trader the presence of significant
buying interest around the low
While dealing with a fairly random environment such as the markets, what a trader
really needs is a well crafted trade setup. The occurrence of the above two
conditions (marubuzo + support near the low) suggests the same action i.e to
initiate a long trade in this case.
This leads us to an important idea. What if we had a checklist (call it a framework if
you like) for every trade that we consider? The checklist would act as a guiding
principle before initiating a trade. The trade should comply to the conditions
specified in the checklist. If it does, we take the trade; else we just drop it and look
for another trade opportunity that complies with the checklist.
Discipline, they say makes up for the 80% of the trader’s success. The checklist in my
opinion forces you to be disciplined; it helps you avoid taking abrupt and reckless
trading decision.
In fact to begin with we have the first two very important factors of the checklist:
1. The stock should form a recognizable candlestick pattern
1. Note: We have learnt some of the popular patterns in this module. To begin with
you can use just these patterns to comply with checklist
2. S&R should confirm to the trade. The stoploss price should be around S&R
1. For a long trade, the low of the pattern should be around the support
2. For a short trade, the high of the pattern should be around the resistance
Going forward in this module, as and when we learn new TA concepts, we will build
this checklist. But just to quench your curiosity, the final checklist will have 6
checklist points. In fact when we have the grand 6 checklist points, we will weigh
down each one of them. For example, checklist point number 4 may not be as
important as point number 1, but nevertheless it is more important than 100 other
factors that distract the trader.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. S&R are price points on the chart

83

2. Support is a price point below the current market price that indicate buying interest
3. Resistance is a price point above the current market price that indicate selling
interest
4. To identify S&R, place a horizontal line in such a way that it connects at least 3 price
action zones, well spaced in time. The more number of price action zones (well
spaced in time) the horizontal line connects, the stronger is S&R
5. S&R can be used to identify targets for the trade. For a long trade, look for the
immediate resistance level as target. For a short trade, look for the immediate
support level as target.
6. Lastly, comply with the checklist for optimal trading results

84

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 12

Volumes
307

Volume plays a very integral role in technical analysis as it helps us to confirm
trends and patterns. Consider volumes as means to gain insights into how other
participants perceive the market.

Volumes indicate how many shares are bought and sold over a given period of time.
The more active the share, higher would be its volume. For example, you decide to
buy 100 shares of Amara Raja Batteries at 485, and I decide to sell 100 shares of
Amara Raja Batteries at 485. There is a price and quantity match, which results in a
trade. You and I together have created a volume of 100 shares. Many people tend to
assume volume count as 200 (100 buy + 100 sell) which is not the right way to look
at volumes.
The following fictional example should help you understand how volumes add up
on a typical trading day:

Sl No

Time

Buy Quantity

Sell Quantity

Price

Volume

Cumulative Volume

01

9:30 AM

400

400

62.20

400

400

85

02

10.30 AM

500

500

62.75

500

900

03

11:30 AM

350

350

63.10

350

1,250

04

12:30 PM

150

150

63.50

150

1,400

05

1:30 PM

625

625

63.75

625

2,025

06

2:30 PM

475

475

64.20

475

2,500

07

3:30 PM

800

800

64.50

800

3,300

At 9:30 AM there were 400 shares exchanged at the price of 62.20. An hour later,
500 shares were traded at 62.75. So at 10:30 AM if you were to check the total
volume for the day, it would be 900 (400 + 500). Likewise 350 shares at 63.10 were
traded at 11:30 AM, and upto 11:30 AM, the volume was 1,250 (400+500+350). So
on, and so forth.
Here is a screen shot from the live market highlighting the volumes for some of the
shares. The screen shot was taken around 2:55 PM on 5th of August 2014.

If you notice, the volume on Cummins India Limited is 12,72,737 shares, likewise the
volume on Naukri (Info Edge India Limited) is 85,427 shares.
The volume information that you see here is the cumulative volume. Meaning, at
2:55 PM, a total of 12,72,737 shares of Cummins were traded at various price points
ranging from 634.90 (low) and 689.85 (high).

86

With 35 minutes left for the markets to close, it is only logical to expect the volumes
to increase (of course assuming traders continue to trade the stock for the rest of
the day). In fact here is another screen shot taken at 3:30 PM for the same set of
stocks with volume highlighted.

As you can see, the volume for Cummins India Limited has increased from 12,72,737
to 13,49,736. Therefore, for Cummins India the volume for the day is 13,49,736
shares. The volume for Naukri has increased from 85,427 to 86,712, making 86,712
shares as the volume for the day. It is important for you to note that the volumes
shown here are cumulative.

12.1 – The volume trend table
Volume information on its own is quite useless. For example, we know that the
volumes on Cummins India is 13,49,736 shares. So how useful is this information
when read in isolation? If you think about it, it has no merit and hence would
actually mean nothing. However when you associate today’s volume information
with the preceding price and volume trend, then volume information becomes lot
more meaningful.
In the table below you will find a summary of how to use volume information:

Sl No

Price

Volume

What is the expectation?

01

Increases

Increases

Bullish

02

Increases

Decreases

Caution – weak hands buying

87

03

Decreases

Increases

Bearish

04

Decreases

Decreases

Caution – weak hands selling

The first line in the table above says, when the price increases along with an
increase in volume, the expectation is bullish.
Before we understand the table above in detail, think about this – we are talking
about an ‘increase in volume’. What does this actually mean? What is the reference
point? Should it be an increase over the previous day’s volume number or the
previous week’s aggregate volume?
As a practice, traders usually compare today’s volume over the average of the last
10 days volume. Generally the rule of thumb is as follows:
High Volume = Today’s volume > last 10 days average volume
Low Volume = Today’s volume < last 10 days average volume
Average Volume = Today’s volume = last 10 days average volume
To get the last 10 day average, all you need to do is draw a moving average line on
the volume bars and the job is done. Of course, we will discuss moving averages in
the next chapter.

In the chart above, you can see that volumes are represented by blue bars (at the
bottom of the chart). The red line overlaid on the volume bars indicates the 10 day
average. As you notice, all the volume bars that are over and above the 10 day
average can be considered as increased volume where some institutional activity (or
large participation) has taken place.
Keeping this in perspective, I would suggest you now look at the volume – price
table.

88

12.2 – Thought process behind the volume trend table
When institutional investors buy or sell they obviously do not transact in small
chunks. For example, think about LIC of India, they are one of the biggest domestic
institutional investors in India. If they would buy shares of Cummins India, would
you think they would buy 500 shares? Obviously not, they would probably buy
500,000 shares or even more. Now, if they were to buy 500,000 shares from the
open market, it will start reflecting in volumes. Besides, because they are buying a
large chunk of shares, the share price also tends to go up. Usually institutional
money is referred to as the “smart money”. It is perceived that ‘smart money’ always
makes wiser moves in the market compared to retail traders. Hence following the
smart money seems like a wise idea.
If both the price and the volume are increasing this only means one thing – a big
player is showing interest in the stock. Going by the assumption that smart money
always makes smart choices the expectation turns bullish and hence one should
look at buying opportunity in the stock.
Or as a corollary, whenever you decide to buy, ensure that the volumes are
substantial. This means that you are buying along with the smart money.
This is exactly what the 1st row in the volume trend table indicates – expectation
turns bullish when both the price and volume increases.
What do you think happens when the price increases but the volume decreases as
indicated in the 2ndrow?
Think about it on the following terms:
1. Why is the price increasing?
1. Because market participants are buying
2. Are there any institutional buyers associated with the price increase?
1. Not likely
3. How would you know that there are no meaningful purchase by institutional
investors
1. Simple, if they were buying then the volumes would have increased and not
decrease
4. So what does an increase in price, associated by decreasing volumes indicate?
1. It means the price is increasing because of a small retail participation and not really
influential buying. Hence you need to be cautious as this could be a possible bull
trap
Going forward, the 3rd row says, a decrease in price along with an increase in
volume sets a bearish expectation. Why do you think so?

89

A decrease in price indicates that market participants are selling the stock. Increase
in volumes indicates the presence of smart money. Both events occurring together
(decrease in price + increase in volumes) should imply that smart money is selling
stocks. Going by the assumption that the smart money always makes smart choices,
the expectation is bearish and hence one should look at selling opportunity in the
stock.
Or as a corollary, whenever you decide to sell, ensure that the volumes are good.
This means that you too are selling, along with the smart money.
Moving forward, what do you think happens when both volume and price decrease
as indicated in the 4throw?
Think about it in on following terms:
1. Why is the price decreasing?
1. Because market participants are selling.
2. Are there any institutional sellers associated with the price decrease?
1. Not likely
3. How would you know that there are no meaningful sell orders by institutional
investors
1. Simple, if they were selling then the volume would increase and not decrease
4. So how would you infer a decline in price and a decline in volume?
1. It means the price is decreasing because of small retail participation, and not really
influential (read as smart money) selling. Hence you need to be cautions as this
could be a possible bear trap.

12.3 – Revisiting the checklist
Let us revisit the checklist and revaluate from the volumes perspective. Imagine this
hypothetical technical situation in a stock:
1. Occurrence of a bullish engulfing pattern – this suggests a long trade for reasons
discussed previously
2. A support level around the low of bullish engulfing – support indicates demand.
Therefore the occurrence of a bullish engulfing pattern near the support area
suggests there is indeed a strong demand for the stock and hence the trader can
look at buying the stock.
1. With a recognizable candlestick pattern and support near the stoploss, the trader
gets a double confirmation to go long
Now along with support near the low, imagine high volumes on the 2nd day of the
bullish engulfing pattern i.e on P2 (blue candle). What can you infer from this?

90

The inference is quite clear – high volumes plus increase in price confirms to us that
large influential market participants are positioning themselves to buy the stock.
With all three independent variables i.e candlesticks, S&R, and volumes suggest to
take the same action i.e to go long. If you realize this is a triple confirmation!
The point that I want to drive across is the fact that volumes are very powerful as it
helps the trader in confirming a trade. For this reason it is an important factor and
therefore must be included in the checklist.
Here is how the updated checklist now stands:
1. The stock should form a recognizable candlestick pattern
2. S&R should confirm the trade. The stoploss price should be around S&R
1. For a long trade, the low of the pattern should be around the support
2. For a short trade, the high of the pattern should be around the resistance
3. Volumes should confirm to the trade
1. Presence of above average volumes on both buy and sell day
2. Low volumes are not encouraging and hence do feel free to hesitate taking a trade
where the volumes are low

Key takeaways from the chapter
1. Volumes are used to confirm a trend
2. 100 share buy and 100 shares sell makes the total volume 100, not 200
3. The end of day volumes indicates the cumulative volume across trades executed
throughout the day
4. High volumes indicates the presence of smart money
5. Low volumes indicate retail participation
6. When you initiate a trade to either go long or short always make sure if volumes
confirm
7. Avoid trading on low volume days

91

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 13

Moving Averages
345

We have all learnt about averages in school, moving average is just an extension of
that. Moving averages are trend indicators and are frequently used due to their
simplicity and effectiveness. Before we learn moving averages, let us have a quick
recap on how averages are calculated.

Assume 5 people are sitting on a nice sunny beach enjoying a nice chilled bottled
beverage. The sun is so bright and nice that each one of them end up drinking
several bottles of the beverage. Assume the final count to be something like this:

Sl No

Person

No of Bottles

01

A

07

02

B

05

03

C

06

04

D

03

92

05

E

08

Total # of bottles consumed

29

Assume a 6th person walks in to find out 29 bottles of beverages lying around them.
He can quickly get a sense of ‘roughly’ how many bottles each of them consumed by
dividing [the total number of bottles] by [total number of people].
In this case it would be:
=29/5
=5.8 bottles per head.
So, the average in this case tells us roughly how many bottles each person had
consumed. Obviously there would be few of them who had consumed above and
below the average. For example, Person E drank 8 bottles of beverage, which is way
above the average of 5.8 bottles. Likewise, person D drank just 3 bottles of
beverage, which is way below the average of 5.8 bottles. Therefore average is just
an estimate and one cannot expect it to be accurate.
Extending the concept to stocks, here are the closing prices of ITC Limited for the
last 5 trading sessions. The last 5 day average close would be calculated as follows:

Date

Closing Price

14/07/14

344.95

15/07/14

342.35

16/07/14

344.20

17/07/14

344.25

18/07/14

344.0

93

Total

1179.75

= 1179.75 / 5
= 343.95
Hence the average closing price of ITC over the last 5 trading sessions is 343.95.

13.1 – The ‘moving’ average (also called the simple moving average)
Consider a situation where you want to calculate the average closing price of Marico
Limited for the latest5 days. The data is as follows:

Date

Closing Price

21/07/14

239.2

22/07/14

240.6

23/07/14

241.8

24/07/14

242.8

25/07/14

247.9

Total

1212.3

= 1212.3/ 5
= 242.5
Hence the average closing price of Marico over the last 5 trading sessions is 242.5
Moving forward, the next day i.e 28th July (26th and 27th were Saturday and Sunday
respectively) we have a new data point. This implies now the ‘new’ latest 5 days
would be 22nd, 23rd, 24th, 25th and 28th. We will drop the data point belonging to the
21st as our objective is to calculate the latest 5 day average.

94

Date

Closing Price

22/07/14

240.6

23/07/14

241.8

24/07/14

242.8

25/07/14

247.9

28/07/14

250.2

Total

1223.3

= 1223.3/ 5
= 244.66
Hence the average closing price of Marico over the last 5 trading sessions is 244.66
As you can see, we have included the latest data (28th July), and discarded the oldest
data (21st July) to calculate the 5 day average. On 29th, we would include 29th data
and exclude 22nd data, on 30th we would include 30th data point but eliminate
23rd data, so on and so forth.
So essentially, we are moving to the latest data point and discarding the oldest to
calculate the latest 5 day average. Hence the name “moving” average!
In the above example, the calculation of moving average is based on the closing
prices. Sometimes, moving averages are also calculated using other parameters
such as high, low, and open. However the closing prices are used mostly by the
traders and investors as it reflects the price at which the market finally settles down.
Moving averages can be calculated for any time frame, from minutes, hours to
years. Any time frame can be selected from the charting software based of your
requirements.

95

For those of you familiar with excel, here is a screenshot of how moving averages
are calculated on MS Excel. Notice how the cell reference moves in the average
formula, eliminating the oldest to include the latest data points.

Cell Ref

Date

Close Price

5 Day Average

Average Formula

D3

1-Jan-14

1287.7

D4

2-Jan-14

1279.25

D5

3-Jan-14

1258.95

D6

6-Jan-14

1249.7

D7

7-Jan-14

1242.4

D8

8-Jan-14

1268.75

1263.6

=AVERAGE(D3:D7)

D9

9-Jan-14

1231.2

1259.81

=AVERAGE(D4:D8)

D10

10-Jan-14

1201.75

1250.2

=AVERAGE(D5:D9)

D11

13-Jan-14

1159.2

1238.76

=AVERAGE(D6:D10)

D12

14-Jan-14

1157.25

1220.66

=AVERAGE(D7:D11)

D13

15-Jan-14

1141.35

1203.63

=AVERAGE(D8:D12)

D14

16-Jan-14

1152.5

1178.15

=AVERAGE(D9:D13)

96

D15

17-Jan-14

1139.6

1162.41

=AVERAGE(D10:D14)

D16

20-Jan-14

1140.6

1149.98

=AVERAGE(D11:D15)

D17

21-Jan-14

1166.35

1146.26

=AVERAGE(D12:D16)

D18

22-Jan-14

1165.4

1148.08

=AVERAGE(D13:D17)

D19

23-Jan-14

1168.25

1152.89

=AVERAGE(D14:D18)

As it is evident, the moving average changes as and when the closing price changes.
A moving average as calculated above is called a ‘Simple Moving Average’ (SMA).
Since we are calculating it as per the latest 5 days of data it is called referred to as 5
Day SMA.
The averages for the 5 day (or it could be anything like 5, 10, 50, 100, 200 days) are
then joined to form a smooth curving line known as the moving average line, and it
continues to move as the time progresses.
In the chart shown below, I have overlaid a 5 day SMA over ACC’s candlestick graph.

97

So what does a moving average indicate and how does one use it? Well, there are
many applications of moving average and shortly I will introduce a simple trading
system based on moving averages. But before that, let us learn about the
Exponential Moving Average.

13.2 – The exponential moving average
Consider the data points used in the this example,

Date

Closing Price

22/07/14

240.6

23/07/14

241.8

24/07/14

242.8

25/07/14

247.9

28/07/14

250.2

Total

1214.5

When one calculates the average across these numbers there is an unstated
assumption. We are essentially giving each data point equal importance. Meaning,
we are assuming that the data point on 22ndJuly is as important as the data point on
28th July. However, when it comes to markets, this may not always be true
Remember the basic assumption of technical analysis – markets discount
everything. This means the latest price that you see (on 28th July) discounts all the
known and unknown information. This also implies the price on 28th is more sacred
than the price on 25th.
Going by this, one would like to assign weightage to data points based on the
‘newness’ of the data. Therefore the data point on 28th July gets the highest
weightage, 25th July gets the next highest weightage, 24th July gets the 3rd highest, and
so on.

98

By doing so, I have essentially scaled the data points according to its newness – the
latest data point gets the maximum attention and the oldest data point gets the
least attention.
The average calculated on this scaled set of numbers gives us the Exponential
Moving Average (EMA). I deliberately skipped the EMA calculation part, simply
because most of the technical analysis software lets us drag and drop the EMA on
prices. Hence we will focus on EMA’s application as opposed to its calculation.
Here is a chart of Cipla Ltd. I have plotted a 50 day SMA (black) and a 50 day EMA
(red) on Cipla’s closing prices. Though both SMA and EMA are for a 50 day period,
you can notice that the EMA is more reactive to the prices and hence it sticks closer
to the price.

The reason why EMA is quicker to react to the current market price is because EMA
gives more importance to the most recent data points. This helps the trader to take
quicker trading decisions. Hence for this reason, traders prefer the use of the EMA
over the SMA.

13.3 – A simple application of moving average
The moving average can be used to identify buying and selling opportunities with its
own merit. When the stock price trades above its average price, it means the traders
are willing to buy the stock at a price higher than its average price. This means the
traders are optimistic about the stock price going higher. Therefore one should look
at buying opportunities.
Likewise, when the stock price trades below its average price, it means the traders
are willing to sell the stock at a price lesser than its average price. This means the
traders are pessimistic about the stock price movement. Therefore one should look
at selling opportunities.

99

We can develop a simple trading system based on these conclusions. A trading
system can be defined as a set of rules that help you identify entry and exit points.
We will now try and define one such trading system based on a 50 day exponential
moving average. Remember a good trading system gives you a signal to enter a
trade and a signal to close out the trade. We can define the moving average trading
system with the following rules:
Rule 1) Buy (go long) when the current market price turns greater than the 50 day
EMA. Once you go long, you should stay invested till the necessary sell condition is
satisfied
Rule 2) Exit the long position (square off) when the current market price turns lesser
than the 50 day EMA
Here is a chart that shows the application of the trading system on Ambuja
cements. The black line on the price chart is the 50 day exponential moving average.

Starting from left, the first opportunity to buy originated at 165, highlighted on the
charts as B1@165. Notice, at point B1, the stock price moved to a point higher than
its 50 day EMA. Hence as per the trading system rule, we initiate a fresh long
position.
Going by the trading system, we stay invested till we get an exit signal, which we
eventually got at 187, marked as S1@187. This trade generated a profit of Rs.22 per
share.

100

The next signal to go long came at B2@178, followed by a signal to square off
at S2@182. This trade was not impressive as it resulted in a profit of just Rs.4.
However the last trade, B3@165, and S3@215 was quite impressive resulting in a
profit of Rs.50.
Here is a quick summary of these trades based on the trading system fared:

Sl No

Buy Price

Sell Price

Gain/Loss

% Return

01

165

187

22

13%

02

178

182

04

2.2%

03

165

215

50

30%

From the above table, it is very clear that the first and last trades were profitable,
but the 2nd trade was not so profitable. If you inspect why this happened, it is
evident that during the 1st and the 3rd trade, the stock was trending but during the
2nd trade the stock moved sideways.
This leads us to a very important conclusion about the moving averages. Moving
averages works brilliantly when there is a trend and fails to perform when the stock
moves sideways. This basically means the ‘Moving average’ in its simplest form is a
trend following system.
From my own personal experience of trading based on moving averages, I have
noticed a few important characteristics:
1. Moving averages gives you many trading signals (buy and sell) during a sideways
market. Most of these signals result in marginal profits, if not for losses
2. However usually one of those many trades results in a massive rally (like
the B3@165 trade) leading to impressive gains
3. It would be very difficult to segregate the big winner from the many small trades
4. Hence the trader should not be selective in terms of selecting signals that moving
average system suggest. In fact the trader should trade all the trades that the
system suggests
5. Remember the losses are minimum in a moving average system, but that 1 big
trade is good enough to compensate all the losses and can give you sufficient
profits

101

6. The profit making trade ensures you are in the trend as long as the trend lasts.
Sometime even upto several months. For this reason, MA can be used as a proxy for
identifying long term investment ideas
7. The key to MA trading system is to take all the trades and not be judgmental about
the signals being generated by the system.
Here is another example of BPLC, where the MA system suggested multiple trades
during the sideways market, however none of them were really profitable. However,
the last trade resulted in a 67% profit in about 5 months.

13.4 – Moving average crossover system
As its evident now the problem with the plain vanilla moving average system is that
it generates far too many trading signals in a sideway market. A moving average
crossover system is an improvisation over the plain vanilla moving average system.
It helps the trader to take fewer trades in a sideways market.
In a MA crossover system, instead of the usual single moving average, the trader
combines two moving averages. This is usually referred to as ‘smoothing’.
A typical example of this would be to combine a 50 day EMA, with a 100 day EMA.
The shorter moving average (50 days in this case) is also referred to as the faster
moving average. The longer moving average (100 days moving average) is referred
to as the slower moving average.
The shorter moving average takes lesser number of data points to calculate the
average and hence it tends to stick closer to the current market price, and therefore
reacts more quickly. A longer moving average takes more number of data points to
calculate the average and hence it tends to stay away from the current market price.
Hence the reactions are slower.
Here is the chart of Bank of Baroda, showing you how the two moving averages
stack up when loaded on a chart.

102

As you can see, the black 50 day EMA line is closer to the current market price (as it
reacts faster) when compared to the pink 100 day EMA (as its reacts slower).
Traders have modified the plain vanilla MA system with the crossover system to
smoothen out the entry and exit points. In the process, the trader gets far fewer
signals, but the chances of the trade being profitable are quite high.
The entry and exit rules for the crossover system is as stated below:
Rule 1) – Buy (fresh long) when the short term moving averages turns greater than
the long term moving average. Stay in the trade as long as this condition is satisfied
Rule 2) – Exit the long position (square off) when the short term moving average
turns lesser than the longer term moving average
Let us apply the MA crossover system to the same BPCL example that we looked at.
For ease of comparison, I have reproduced the BPCL’s chart with a single 50 day MA.

Notice, when the markets were moving sideways, MA suggested at least 3 trading
signals. However the 4thtrade was the winner which resulted in 67% profit.
The chart shown below shows the application of a MA crossover system with 50 and
100 day EMA.

103

The black line plots the 50 day moving average and the pink line plots the 100 day
moving average. As per the cross over rule, the signal to go long originates when the
50 day moving average (short term MA) crosses over the 100 day moving average
(long term MA). The crossover point has been highlighted with an arrow. Please do
notice how the crossover system keeps the trader away from the 3 unprofitable
trades. This is the biggest advantage of a cross over system.
A trader can use any combination to create a MA cross over system. Some of the
popular combinations for a swing trader would be:
1. 9 day EMA with 21 day EMA – use this for short term trades ( upto few trading
session)
2. 25 day EMA with 50 day EMA – use this to identify medium term trade (upto few
weeks)
3. 50 day EMA with 100 Day EMA – use this to identify trades that lasts upto few
months
4. 100 day EMA with 200 day EMA – use this to identify long term trades (investment
opportunities), some of them can even last for over a year or more.
Remember, longer the time frame the lesser the number of trading signals.
Here is an example of a 25 x 50 EMA crossover. There are three trading signals that
qualify under the crossover rule.

104

Needless to say, the MA crossover system can also be applied for intraday trading.
For instance one could use the 15 x 30 minutes crossover to identify intraday
opportunities. A more aggressive trader could use 5 x 10 minute crossover.
You may have heard this popular saying in the markets – “The trend is you friend”.
Well, the moving averages help you identify this friend.
Remember, MA is a trend following system – as long as there is a trend, the moving
averages works brilliantly. It does not matter which time frame you use or which
cross over combination you use.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. A standard average calculation is a quick approximation of a series of numbers
2. In a average calculation where the latest data is included, and the oldest is excluded
is called a Moving Average
3. The simple moving average (SMA) gives equal weightage to all data points in the
series
4. An exponential moving average (EMA) scales the data according to its newness.
Recent data gets the maximum weightage and the oldest gets the least weightage
5. For all practical purposes, use an EMA as opposed to SMA. This is because the EMA
gives more weightage to the most recent data points
6. The outlook is bullish when the current market price is greater than the EMA. The
outlook turns bearish when the current market price turns lesser than the EMA
7. In a non trending market, moving averages may result in whipsaws thereby causing
frequent losses. To overcome this a EMA crossover system is adopted
8. In a typical crossover system, the price chart is over laid with two EMAs. The shorter
EMA is faster to react, while the longer EMA is slower to react

105

9. The outlook turns bullish when the faster EMA crosses and is above the slower EMA.
Hence one should look at buying the stock. The trade lasts upto a point where the
faster EMA starts going below the slower EMA
10. The longer the time frame one chooses for a crossover system, the lesser the
trading signals.

106

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 14

Indicators (Part 1)
138

If you look at a stock chart displayed on a trader’s trading terminal, you are most
likely to see lines running all over the chart. These lines are called the ‘Technical
Indicators’. A technical indicator helps a trader analyze the price movement of a
security.
Indicators are independent trading systems introduced to the world by successful
traders. Indicators are built on preset logic using which traders can supplement
their technical study (candlesticks, volumes, S&R) to arrive at a trading decision.
Indicators help in buying, selling, confirming trends, and sometimes predicting
trends.
Indicators are of two types namely leading and lagging. A leading indicator leads
the price, meaning it usually signals the occurrence of a reversal or a new trend in
advance. While this sounds interesting, you should note, not all leading indicators
are accurate. Leading indicators are notorious for giving false signals. Therefore, the
trader should be highly alert while using leading indicators. In fact the efficiency of
using leading indicators increases with trading experience.
A majority of leading indicators are called oscillators as they oscillate within a
bounded range. Typically an oscillator oscillates between two extreme values – for
example 0 to 100. Based on the oscillator’s reading (for example 55, 70 etc) the
trading interpretation varies.
A lagging indicator on the other hand lags the price; meaning it usually signals the
occurrence of a reversal or a new trend after it has occurred. You may think, what

107

would be the use of getting a signal after the event has occurred? Well, it is better
late than never. One of the most popular lagging indicators is the moving averages.
You might be wondering if the moving average is an indicator in itself, why we
discussed it even before we discussed the indicators formally. The reason is that
moving averages is a core concept on its own. It finds its application within several
indicators such as RSI, MACD, Stochastic etc. Hence, for this reason we discussed
moving average as a standalone topic.
Before we proceed further into understanding individual indicators, I think it is a
good idea to understand what momentum means. Momentum is the rate at which
the price changes. For example if stock price is Rs.100 today and it moves to Rs.105
the next day, and Rs.115, the day after, we say the momentum is high as the stock
price has changed by 15% in just 3 days. However if the same 15% change
happened over let us say 3 months, we can conclude the momentum is low. So the
more rapidly the price changes, the higher the momentum.

14.1 – Relative Strength Index
Relative strength Index or just RSI, is a very popular indicator developed by J.Welles
Wilder. RSI is a leading momentum indicator which helps in identifying a trend
reversal. RSI indicator oscillates between 0 and 100, and based on the latest
indicator reading, the expectations on the markets are set.
The term “Relative Strength Index” can be a bit misleading as it does not compare
the relative strength of two securities, but instead shows the internal strength of the
security. RSI is the most popular leading indicator, which gives out strongest signals
during the periods of sideways and non trending ranges.
The formula to calculate the RSI is as follows:

Let us understand this indicator with the help of the following example:
Assume the stock is trading at 99 on day 0, with this in perspective; consider the
following data points:

Sl No

Closing Price

Points Gain

108

Points Lost

01

100

1

0

02

102

2

0

03

105

3

0

04

107

2

0

05

103

0

4

06

100

0

3

07

99

0

1

08

97

0

2

09

100

3

0

10

105

5

0

11

107

2

0

12

110

3

0

13

114

4

0

14

118

4

0

109

Total

29

10

In the above table, points gained/lost denote the number of points gained/lost with
respect to the previous day close. For example if today’s close is 104 and yesterday’s
close was 100, points gained would be 4 and points lost would be 0. Similarly, if
today’s close was 104 and previous day’s close was 107, the points gained would be
0 and points lost would be 3. Please note that, the loses are computed as positive
values.
We have used 14 data points for the calculation, which is the default period setting
in the charting software. This is also called the ‘look-back period’. If you are
analyzing hourly charts the default period is 14 hours, and if you are analyzing daily
charts, the default period is 14 days.
The first step is to calculate ‘RS’ also called the RSI factor. RS as you can see in the
formula, is the ratio of average points gained by the average points lost.
Average Points Gained = 29/14
= 2.07
Average Points Lost = 10/14
= 0.714
RS = 2.07/0.714
= 2.8991
Plugging in the value of RS in RSI formula,
= 100 – [100/ (1+2.8991)]
= 100 – [100/3.8991]
= 100 – 25.6469
RSI = 74.3531
As you can see RSI calculation is fairly simple. The objective of using RSI is to help
the trader identify over sold and overbought price areas. Overbought implies that
the positive momentum in the stock is so high that it may not be sustainable for
long and hence there could be a correction. Likewise, an oversold position indicates
that the negative momentum is high leading to a possible reversal.
Take a look at the chart of Cipla Ltd, you will find a lot of interesting developments:

110

To begin with, the red line below the price chart indicates the 14 period RSI. If you
notice the RSI’s scale you will realize its upper bound to 100, and lower bound to 0.
However 100 and 0 are not visible in the chart.
When the RSI reading is between 30 and 0, the security is supposed to be oversold
and ready for an upward correction. When the security reading is between 70 and
100, the security is supposed to be heavily bought and is ready for a downward
correction.
The first vertical line marked from left shows a level where RSI is below 30, in fact
RSI is 26.8. Hence RSI suggests that the stock is oversold. In this particular example,
the RSI value of 26.8, also coincides with a bullish engulfing pattern. This gives the
trader a double confirmation to go long! Needless to say, both volumes and S&R
should also confirm to this.
The second vertical line, points to a level where the RSI turns 81, a value which is
considered overbought. Hence, if not for looking at shorting opportunities, the
trader should be careful in his decision to buy the stock. Again, if you notice the
candles, they form a bearish engulfing pattern. So a bearish engulfing pattern,
backed by an RSI of 81 is a sign to short the stock. What follows this is a quick and a
short correction in the stock.
The example that I have shown here is quite nice, meaning both the candlestick
pattern and RSI perfectly align to confirm the occurrence of the same event. This
may not always be true. This leads us to another interesting way to interpret RSI.
Imagine the following two scenarios:
Scenario 1) A stock which is in a continuous uptrend (remember the uptrend can
last from few days to few years) the RSI will remain stuck in the overbought region
for a long time, and this is because the RSI is upper bound to 100. It cannot go
beyond 100. Invariably the trader would be looking at shorting opportunities but the
stock on the other hand will be in a different orbit. Example – Eicher motors Limited,
the stock has generate a return of close to 100% year on year.

111

Scenario 2) A stock which is in a continuous downtrend the RSI will be stuck in the
oversold region since the RSI is lower bound to 0. It cannot go beyond 0. In this case
as well the trader will be looking at buying opportunities but the stock will be going
down lower. Example – Suzlon Energy, the stock has generated a return of negative
34% year on year.
This leads us to interpret RSI in many different ways besides the classical
interpretation (which we discussed earlier)
1. If the RSI is fixed in an overbought region for a prolonged period, look for buying
opportunities instead of shorting. The RSI stays in the overbought region for a
prolonged period because of an excess positive momentum
2. If the RSI is fixed in an oversold region for a prolonged period, look for selling
opportunities rather than buying. RSI stays in the oversold region for a prolonged
period because of an excess negative momentum
3. If the RSI value starts moving away from the oversold value after a prolonged
period, look for buying opportunities. For example, the RSI moves above 30 after a
long time may mean that the stock may have bottomed out, hence a case of going
long.
4. If the RSI value starts moving away from the overbought value after a prolonged
period, look for selling opportunities. For example, RSI moving below 70 after a long
time. This means the stock may have topped out, hence a case for shorting

14.2 – One last note
None of the parameters used while analyzing RSI should be treated with rigidity. For
example, J.Welles Wilder opted to use a look back period of 14 days simply because
that was the value which gave the best results considering the market conditions in
1978 (which is when RSI was introduced to the world). You may choose to use
5,10,20, or even 100 days look back period if you wish too. In fact this is how you
develop your edge as a trader. You need to analyze what works for you and adopt
the same. Please note, fewer the days you use to calculate the RSI, the more volatile
the indicator would be.
Also, J.Welles Wilder decided to use 0-30 level to indicate oversold regions and 70100 level to indicate overbought region. Again this is not set in stone, you can arrive
at you own combination.
I personally prefer to use 0-20 level and 80-100 level to identify oversold and
overbought regions respectively. I use this along with the classical 14 day look back
period.
Of course, I urge you to explore parameters that work for you. In fact this is how
you would eventually develop as a successful trader.

112

Finally, do remember RSI is not used often as a standalone indicator by traders, it is
used along with other candlestick patterns and indicators to study the market.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. Indicators are independent trading systems developed, and introduced by
successful traders
2. Indicators are leading or lagging. Leading indicators signals the possible occurrence
of an event. Lagging indicators on the other hand confirms an ongoing trend
3. RSI is a momentum oscillator which oscillates between 0 and 100 level
4. A value between 0 and 30 is considered oversold, hence the trader should look at
buying opportunities
5. A value between 70 and 100 is considered overbought, hence the trader should look
at selling opportunities
6. If the RSI value is fixed in a region for a prolonged period, it indicates excess
momentum and hence instead of taking a reversed position, the trader can consider
initiating a trade in the same direction.

113

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 15

Indicators (Part 2)
193

15.1 Moving Average Convergence and Divergence (MACD)
The Moving Average Convergence and Divergence (MACD) indicator was developed
by Gerald Appel in the late seventies. Traders consider MACD as the grand old
daddy of indicators. Though invented in the seventies, MACD is still considered as
one of the most reliable indicators by momentum traders.
As the name suggests, MACD is all about the convergence and divergence of the two
moving averages. Convergence occurs when the two moving averages move
towards each other, and a divergence occurs when the moving averages move away
from each other.
A standard MACD is calculated using a 12 day EMA and a 26 day EMA. Please note,
both the EMA’s are based on the closing prices.We subtract the 26 EMA from the 12
day EMA, to estimate the convergence and divergence (CD) value. A simple line
graph of this is often referred to as the ‘MACD Line’. Let us go through the math
first and then figure out the applications of MACD.

Date

Close

12 Day EMA

114

26 Day EMA

MACD Line

1-Jan-14

6302

2-Jan-14

6221

3-Jan-14

6211

6-Jan-14

6191

7-Jan-14

6162

8-Jan-14

6175

9-Jan-14

6168

10-Jan-14

6171

13-Jan-14

6273

14-Jan-14

6242

15-Jan-14

6321

16-Jan-14

6319

17-Jan-14

6262

6230

20-Jan-14

6304

6226

115

21-Jan-14

6314

6233

22-Jan-14

6339

6242

23-Jan-14

6346

6254

24-Jan-14

6267

6269

27-Jan-14

6136

6277

28-Jan-14

6126

6274

29-Jan-14

6120

6271

30-Jan-14

6074

6258

31-Jan-14

6090

6244

3-Feb-14

6002

6225

4-Feb-14

6001

6198

5-Feb-14

6022

6176

6-Feb-14

6036

6153

6198

-45

7-Feb-14

6063

6130

6188

-58

116

10-Feb-14

6053

6107

6182

-75

11-Feb-14

6063

6083

6176

-94

12-Feb-14

6084

6066

6171

-106

13-Feb-14

6001

6061

6168

-107

Let us go through the table starting from left:
1. We have the dates, starting from 1st Jan 2014
2. Next to the dates we have the closing price of Nifty
3. We leave the first 12 data points (closing price of Nifty) to calculate the 12 day EMA
4. We then leave the first 26 data points to calculate the 26 day EMA
5. Once we have both 12 and 26 day EMA running parallel to each other (6th Feb 2014)
we calculate the MACD value
6. MACD value = [12 day EMA – 26 day EMA]. For example on 6th Feb 2014, 12 day EMA
was 6153, and 26 day EMA was 6198, hence the MACD would be 6153-6198 = – 45
When we calculate the MACD value over a series of 12 and 26 day EMAs and plot it
as a line graph, we get the MACD line, which oscillates above and below the central
line.

Date

Close

1-Jan-14

6302

2-Jan-14

6221

3-Jan-14

6211

6-Jan-14

6191

12 Day EMA

117

26 Day EMA

MACD Line

7-Jan-14

6162

8-Jan-14

6175

9-Jan-14

6168

10-Jan-14

6171

13-Jan-14

6273

14-Jan-14

6242

15-Jan-14

6321

16-Jan-14

6319

17-Jan-14

6262

6230

20-Jan-14

6304

6226

21-Jan-14

6314

6233

22-Jan-14

6339

6242

23-Jan-14

6346

6254

24-Jan-14

6267

6269

118

27-Jan-14

6136

6277

28-Jan-14

6126

6274

29-Jan-14

6120

6271

30-Jan-14

6074

6258

31-Jan-14

6090

6244

3-Feb-14

6002

6225

4-Feb-14

6001

6198

5-Feb-14

6022

6176

6-Feb-14

6036

6153

6198

-45

7-Feb-14

6063

6130

6188

-58

10-Feb-14

6053

6107

6182

-75

11-Feb-14

6063

6083

6176

-94

12-Feb-14

6084

6066

6171

-106

13-Feb-14

6001

6061

6168

-107

119

14-Feb-14

6048

6051

6161

-111

17-Feb-14

6073

6045

6157

-112

18-Feb-14

6127

6045

6153

-108

19-Feb-14

6153

6048

6147

-100

20-Feb-14

6091

6060

6144

-84

21-Feb-14

6155

6068

6135

-67

24-Feb-14

6186

6079

6129

-50

25-Feb-14

6200

6092

6126

-34

26-Feb-14

6239

6103

6122

-19

28-Feb-14

6277

6118

6119

-1

3-Mar-14

6221

6136

6117

20

4-Mar-14

6298

6148

6112

36

5-Mar-14

6329

6172

6113

59

6-Mar-14

6401

6196

6121

75

120

7-Mar-14

6527

6223

6131

92

10-Mar-14

6537

6256

6147

110

11-Mar-14

6512

6288

6165

124

12-Mar-14

6517

6324

6181

143

13-Mar-14

6493

6354

6201

153

14-Mar-14

6504

6380

6220

160

Given the MACD value, lets try and find the answer for few obvious questions:
1. What does a negative MACD value indicate?
2. What does a positive MACD value indicate?
3. What does the magnitude of the MACD value actually mean? As in, what information
does a -90 MACD convey versus a – 30 MACD ?
The sign associated with the MACD just indicates the direction of the stock’s move.
For example if the 12 Day EMA is 6380, and 26 Day EMA is 6220 then the MACD
value is +160. Now, under what circumstance do you think the 12 day EMA will be
greater than the 26 day EMA? Well, we had looked into this in the moving average
chapter. The shorter term average will generally be higher than the longer term only
when the stock price is trending upwards. Also, do remember, the shorter term
average will always be more reactive to the current market price than the longer
term average. Hence a positive sign tells us that there is positive momentum in the
stock, and the stock is drifting upwards. The higher the momentum, the higher is
the magnitude. For example, +160 indicate a positive trend which is stronger than
+120.
However, while dealing with the magnitude, always remember the price of the stock
influences the magnitude. For example, higher the underlying price such as Bank
Nifty, naturally, the higher will be the magnitude of the MACD.
When the MACD is negative, it means the 12 day EMA is lower than the 26 day EMA.
Therefore the momentum is negative. Higher the magnitude of the MACD, the more
strength in the downward trend.

121

The difference between the two moving averages is called the MACD spread. The
spread decreases when the momentum mellows down and increases when the
momentum increases. To visualize convergence and the divergence traders usually
plot the chart of the MACD value, often referred to as the MACD line.
The following is the MACD line chart of Nifty for data points starting from 1st Jan
2014 to 18th Aug 2014.

As you can see the MACD line oscillates over a central zero line. This is also called
the ‘Center line’. The basic interpretation of the MACD indicator is that:
1. When the MACD Line crosses the center line from the negative territory to positive
territory, it means there is divergence between the two averages. This is a sign of
increasing bullish momentum; therefore one should look at buying opportunities.
From the chart above, we can see this panning out around 27thFeb
2. When the MACD line crosses the center line from positive territory to the negative
territory it means there is convergence between the two averages. This is a sign of
increasing bearish momentum; therefore one should look at selling opportunities.
As you can see, there were two instance during which the MACD almost turned
negative (8th May, and 24th July) but the MACD just stopped at the zero line and
reversed directions
Traders generally argue that while waiting for the MACD line to crossover the center
line a bulk of the move would already be done and perhaps it would be late to enter
a trade. To overcome this, there is an improvisation over this basic MACD line. The
improvisation comes in the form of an additional MACD component which is the 9
day signal line. A 9 day signal line is a exponential moving average (EMA) of the
MACD line. If you think about this, we now have two lines:
1. A MACD line
2. A 9 day EMA of the MACD line, also called the signal line

122

With these two lines, a trader can follow a simple 2 line crossover strategy as
discussed in the moving averages chapter, and no longer wait for the center line
cross over.
1. The sentiment is bullish when the MACD line crosses the 9 day EMA wherein MACD
line is greater than the 9 day EMA. When this happens, the trader should look at
buying opportunities
2. The sentiment is bearish when the MACD line crosses below the 9 day EMA wherein
the MACD line is lesser than the 9 day EMA. When this happens, the trader should
look at selling opportunities
The chart below plots the MACD indicator on Asian Paints Limited. You can see the
MACD indicator below the price chart.

The indicator uses standard parameters of MACD:
1. 12 day EMA of closing prices
2. 26 day EMA of closing prices
3. MACD line (12D EMA – 26D EMA) represented by the black line
4. 9 day EMA of the MACD line represented by the red line
The vertical lines on the chart highlight the crossover points on the chart where a
signal to either buy or sell has originated.
For example, the first vertical line starting from left points to a crossover where the
MACD line lies below the signal line (9 day EMA) lies and suggests a short trade.
The 2nd vertical line from left, points to a crossover where the MACD line lies above
the signal line, hence one should look at buying opportunity. So on and so forth.
Please note, at the core of the MACD system, are moving averages. Hence the MACD
indicator has similar properties like that of a moving average system. They work

123

quite well when there is a strong trend and are not too useful when the markets are
moving sideways. You can notice this between the 1st two line starting from left.
Needless to say, the MACD parameters are not set in stone. One is free to change
the 12 day, and 26 day EMA to whatever time frame one prefers. I personally like to
use the MACD in its original form, as introduced by Gerald Appel.

15.2 – The Bollinger Bands
Introduced by John Bollinger in the 1980s, Bollinger bands (BB) is perhaps one of
the most useful indicators used in technical analysis. BB are used to determine
overbought and oversold levels, where a trader will try to sell when the price
reaches the top of the band and will execute a buy when the price reaches the
bottom of the band.
The BB has 3 components:
1. Middle line which is The 20 day simple moving average of the closing prices
2. An upper band – this is the +2 standard deviation of the middle line
3. A lower band – this is the -2 standard deviation of the middle line
The standard deviation (SD) is a statistical concept; which measures the variance of
a particular variable from its average. In finance, the standard deviation of the stock
price represents the volatility of a stock. For example, if the standard deviation of a
stock is 12%, it is as good as saying that the volatility of the stock is 12%.
In BB, the standard deviation is applied on the 20 day SMA. The upper band
indicates the +2 SD. By using a +2 SD, we simply multiply the SD by 2, and add it to
the average.
For example if the 20 day SMA is 7800, and the SD is 75 (or 0.96%), then the +2 SD
would be 7800 + (75*2) = 7950. Likewise, a -2 SD indicates we multiply the SD by 2,
and subtract it from the average. 7800 – (2*75) = 7650.
We now have the components of the BB:
1. 20 day SMA = 7800
2. Upper band = 7950
3. Lower band = 7650
Statistically speaking, the current market price should hover around the average
price of 7800. However, if the current market price is around 7950, then it is
considered expensive with respect to the average, hence one should look at
shorting opportunities with an expectation that the price will scale back to its
average price.
Therefore the trade would be to sell at 7950, with a target of 7800.

124

Likewise if the current market price is around 7650, it is considered cheap with
respect to the average prices, and hence one should look at buying opportunities
with and expectation that the prices will scale back to its average price.
Therefore the trade would be to buy at 7650, with a target of 7800.
The upper and lower bands act as a trigger to initiate a trade.
The following is the chart of BPCL Limited,

The central black line is the 20 day SMA. The two red lines placed above and below
the black like are the +2 SD, and -2SD. The idea is to short the stock when the price
touches the upper band with an expectation that it will revert to average. Likewise
one can go long when the price touches the lower band with an expectation it will
revert to the average.
I have highlighted using a down arrow all the sell signals BB generated, while most
of the signals worked quite well, there was a phase when the price stuck to the
upper band. In fact the price continued to drift higher, and therefore even the upper
band expanded. This is called an envelope expansion.
The BB’s upper and lower band together forms an envelope. The envelope expands,
whenever the price drifts in a particular direction indicating a strong momentum.
The BB signal fails when there is an envelope expansion. This leads us to an
important conclusion; BB works well in sideways markets, and fails in a trending
market.
Personally whenever, I use BB I expect the trade to start working in my favor almost
immediately. If it does not, I start validating the possibility of an envelope
expansion.

15.3 – Other Indicators
There are numerous other technical indicators, and the list is endless. The question
is, should you know all these indicators to be a successful trader? The answer is a

125

simple no. Technical indicators are good to know, but they by no means should be
your main tool of analysis.
I have personally met many aspiring traders who spend a lot of time, and energy
learning different indicators, but this in the long run is futile. The working
knowledge of few basic indicators, such as the ones discussed in this module are
sufficient.

15.4 – The Checklist
In the previous chapters, we started building a checklist that acts as a guiding force
behind the trader’s decision to buy or sell. It is time to revisit that checklist.
The indicators act as tool which the traders can use to confirm their trading
decisions, it is worthwhile to check what the indicators are conveying before placing
a buy or a sell order. While the dependence on indicators is not as much S&R,
volumes or candlestick patterns, it is always good to know what the basic indicators
are suggesting. For this reason, I would recommend adding indicators in the
checklist, but with a twist to it. I will explain the twist in a bit, but before that let us
reproduce the updated checklist.
1. The stock should form a recognizable candlestick pattern
2. S&R should confirm to the trade. The stoploss price should be around S&R
1. For a long trade, the low of the pattern should be around the support
2. For a short trade, the high of the pattern should be around the resistance
3. Volumes should confirm
1. Ensure above average volumes on both buy and sell day
2. Low volumes are not encouraging, hence do feel free to hesitate while taking trade
where the volumes are low
4. Indicators should confirm
1. Scale the size higher if the confirm
2. If they don’t confirm, go ahead with the original plan
The sub bullet points under indicators are where the twist lies.
Now, hypothetically imagine a situation where you are looking at opportunity to buy
shares of Karnataka Bank Limited. On a particular day, Karnataka Bank has formed
a bullish hammer, assume everything ticks on the checklist:
1. Bullish hammer is a recognizable candlestick pattern
2. The low of the bullish hammer also coincides with the support
3. The volumes are above average
4. There is also an MACD crossover (signal line turns greater than the MACD line)

126

With all four checklist points being ticked off I would be very glad to buy Karnataka
Bank. Hence I place an order to buy, let us say for 500 shares.
However, imagine a situation where the first 3 checklist conditions are met but the
4th condition (indicators should confirm) is not satisfied. What do you think I should
do?
I would still go ahead and buy, but instead of 500 shares, I’d probably buy 300
shares.
This should hopefully convey to you how I tend to (and advocate) the use of
indicators.
When Indicators confirm, I increase my bet size, but when Indicators don’t confirm I
still go ahead with my decision to buy, but I scale down my bet size.
However I would not do this with the first three checklist points. For example, if the
low of the bullish hammer does not coincide in and around the support, then I’ll
really reconsider my plan to buy the stock; in fact I may skip the opportunity, and
look for another opportunity.
But I do not treat the indicators with the same conviction. It is always good to know
what indicators convey, but I don’t base my decisions on that. If the indicators
confirm, I increase the bet size, if they don’t, I still go ahead with my original game
plan.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. A MACD is a trend following system
2. MACD consists of a 12 Day, 26 day EMA
3. MACD line is 12d EMA – 26d EMA
4. Signal line is the 9 day SMA of the MACD line
5. A crossover strategy can be applied between MACD Line, and the signal line
6. The Bollinger band captures the volatility. It has a 20 day average, a +2 SD, and a -2
SD
7. One can short when the current price is at +2SD with an expectation that the price
reverts to the average
8. One can go long when the current price is at -2SD with an expectation that the price
reverts to the average
9. BB works well in a sideways market. In a trending market the BB’s envelope
expands, and generates many false signals

127

10. Indicators are good to know, but it should not be treated as the single source for
decision making.

128

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 16

The Fibonacci Retracements
161

The topic on Fibonacci retracements is quite intriguing. To fully understand and
appreciate the concept of Fibonacci retracements, one must understand the
Fibonacci series. The origins of the Fibonacci series can be traced back to the
ancient Indian mathematic scripts, with some claims dating back to 200 BC.
However, in the 12th century, Leonardo Pisano Bogollo an Italian mathematician
from Pisa, known to his friends as Fibonacci discovered Fibonacci numbers.
The Fibonacci series is a sequence of numbers starting from zero arranged in such a
way that the value of any number in the series is the sum of the previous two
numbers.
The Fibonacci sequence is as follows:
0 , 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, 233, 377, 610…
Notice the following:
233 = 144 + 89
144 = 89 + 55
89 = 55 +34
Needless to say the series extends to infinity. There are few interesting properties of
the Fibonacci series.

129

Divide any number in the series by the previous number; the ratio is always
approximately 1.618.
For example:
610/377 = 1.618
377/233 = 1.618
233/144 = 1.618
The ratio of 1.618 is considered as the Golden Ratio, also referred to as the Phi.
Fibonacci numbers have their connection to nature. The ratio can be found in
human face, flower petals, animal bodies, fruits, vegetables, rock formation, galaxial
formations etc. Of course let us not get into this discussion as we would be
digressing from the main topic. For those interested, I would suggest you search on
the internet for golden ratio examples and you will be pleasantly surprised. Further
into the ratio properties, one can find remarkable consistency when a number is in
the Fibonacci series is divided by its immediate succeeding number.
For example:
89/144 = 0.618
144/233 = 0.618
377/610 = 0.618
At this stage, do bear in mind that 0.618, when expressed in percentage is 61.8%.
Similar consistency can be found when any number in the Fibonacci series is divided
by a number two places higher.
For example:
13/34 = 0.382
21/55 = 0.382
34/89 = 0.382
0.382 when expressed in percentage terms is 38.2%
Also, there is consistency when a number in the Fibonacci series is divided by a
number 3 place higher.
For example:
13/55 = 0.236
21/89 = 0.236
34/144 = 0.236
55/233 = 0.236
0.236 when expressed in percentage terms is 23.6%.

130

16.1 – Relevance to stocks markets
It is believed that the Fibonacci ratios i.e 61.8%, 38.2%, and 23.6% finds its
application in stock charts. Fibonacci analysis can be applied when there is a
noticeable up-move or down-move in prices. Whenever the stock moves either
upwards or downwards sharply, it usually tends to retrace back before its next
move. For example if the stock has run up from Rs.50 to Rs.100, then it is likely to
retrace back to probably Rs.70, before it can move Rs.120.
‘The retracement level forecast’ is a technique using which one can identify upto
which level retracement can happen. These retracement levels provide a good
opportunity for the traders to enter new positions in the direction of the trend. The
Fibonacci ratios i.e 61.8%, 38.2%, and 23.6% helps the trader to identify the possible
extent of the retracement. The trader can use these levels to position himself for
trade.
Have a look at the chart below:

I’ve encircled two points on the chart, at Rs.380 where the stock started its rally and
at Rs.489, where the stock prices peaked.
I would now define the move of 109 (380 – 489) as the Fibonacci upmove. As per
the Fibonacci retracement theory, after the upmove one can anticipate a correction
in the stock to last up to the Fibonacci ratios. For example, the first level up to which
the stock can correct could be 23.6%. If this stock continues to correct further, the
trader can watch out for the 38.2% and 61.8% levels.
Notice in the example shown below, the stock has retraced up to 61.8%, which
coincides with 421.9, before it resumed the rally.

131

We can arrive at 421 by using simple math as well –
Total Fibonacci up move = 109
61.8% of Fibonacci up move = 61.8% * 109 = 67.36
Retracement @ 61.8% = 489- 67.36 = 421.6
Likewise, we can calculate for 38.2% and the other ratios. However one need not
manually do this as the software will do this for us.
Here is another example where the chart has rallied from Rs.288 to Rs.338.
Therefore 50 points move makes up for the Fibonacci upmove. The stock retraced
back 38.2% to Rs.319 before resuming its up move.

The Fibonacci retracements can also be applied to stocks that are falling, in order to
identify levels upto which the stock can bounce back. In the chart below (DLF

132

Limited), the stock started to decline from Rs.187 to Rs. 120.6 thus making 67 points
as the Fibonacci down move.

After the down move, the stock attempted to bounce back retracing back to Rs.162,
which is the 61.8% Fibonacci retracement level.

16.2 – Fibonacci Retracement construction
As we now know Fibonacci retracements are movements in the chart that go against
the trend. To use the Fibonacci retracements we should first identify the 100%
Fibonacci move. The 100% move can be an upward rally or a downward rally. To
mark the 100% move, we need to pick the most recent peak and trough on the
chart. Once this is identified, we connect them using a Fibonacci retracement tool.
This is available in most of the technical analysis software packages including
Zerodha’s Pi
Here is a step by step guide:
Step 1) Identify the immediate peak and trough. In this case the trough is at 150 and
peak is at 240. The 90 point moves make it 100%.

Step 2) Select the Fibonacci retracement tool from the chart tools

133

Step 3) Use the Fibonacci retracement tool to connect the trough and the peak.

After selecting the Fibonacci retracement tool from the charts tool, the trader has to
click on trough first, and without un-clicking he has to drag the line till the peak.
While doing this, simultaneously the Fibonacci retracements levels starts getting
plotted on the chart. However, the software completes the retracement
identification process only after you finish selecting both the trough and the peak.
This is how the chart looks after selecting both the points.

134

You can now see the fibonacci retracement levels are calculated and loaded on the
chart. Use this information to position yourself in the market.

16.3 – How should you use the Fibonacci retracement levels?
Think of a situation where you wanted to buy a particular stock but you have not
been able to do so because of a sharp run up in the stock. In such a situation the
most prudent action to take would be to wait for a retracement in the stock.
Fibonacci retracement levels such as 61.8%, 38.2%, and 23.6% act as a potential
level upto which a stock can correct.
By plotting the Fibonacci retracement levels the trader can identify these
retracement levels, and therefore position himself for an opportunity to enter the
trade. However please note like any indicator, use the Fibonacci retracement as a
confirmation tool.
I would buy a stock only after it has passed the other checklist items. In other words
my conviction to buy would be higher if the stock has:
1. Formed a recognizable candlestick pattern
2. The stoploss coincides with the S&R level
3. Volumes are above average
Along with the above points, if the stoploss also coincides with the Fibonacci level
then I know the trade setup is well aligned to all the variables and hence I would go
in for a strong buy. The usage of the word ‘strong’ just indicates the level of
conviction in the trade set up. The more confirming factors we use to study the
trend and reversal, more robust is the signal. The same logic can also be applied for
the short trade.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. The Fibonacci series forms the basis for Fibonacci retracement
2. A Fibonacci series has many mathematical properties. These mathematical
properties are prevalent in many aspects of nature
3. Traders believe the Fibonacci series has its application in stock charts as it identified
potential retracement levels
4. Fibonacci retracements are levels (61.8%, 38.2%, and 23.6% ) upto which a stock can
possibly retrace before it resumes the original directional move
5. At the Fibonacci retracement level the trader can look at initiating a new trade.
However, before initiating the trade other points in the checklist should also
confirm.

135

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 17

The Dow Theory (Part 1)
82

The Dow Theory has always been a very integral part of technical analysis. The Dow
Theory was used extensively even before the western world discovered
candlesticks. In fact even today Dow Theory concepts are being used. In fact traders
blend the best practices from Candlesticks and Dow Theory.
The Dow Theory was introduced to the world by Charles H. Dow, who also founded
the Dow-Jones financial news service (Wall Street Journal). During his time, he wrote
a series of articles starting from 1900s which in the later years was referred to as
‘The Dow Theory’. Much credit goes to William P Hamilton, who compiled these
articles with relevant examples over a period of 27 years. Much has changed since
the time of Charles Dow, and hence there are supporters and critics of the Dow
Theory.

17.1 – The Dow Theory Principles
The Dow Theory is built on a few beliefs. These are called the Dow Theory tenets.
These tenets were developed by Charles H Dow over the years of his observation on
the markets. There are 9 tenets that are considered as the guiding force behind the
Dow Theory. They are as follows:

Sl
No

Tenet

What does it mean?

136

01

Indices discounts everything

The stock market indices discount everything which is known &
unknown in the public domain. If a sudden and unexpected event
occurs, the stock market indices quickly recalibrates itself to reflect
the accurate value

02

Overall there are 3 broad
market trends

Primary Trend, Secondary Trend, and Minor Trends

The Primary Trend

This is the major trend of the market that lasts from a year to
several years. It indicates the broader multiyear direction of the
market. While the long term investor is interested in the primary
trend, an active trader is interested in all trends. The primary trend
could be a primary uptrend or a primary down trend

04

The Secondary Trend

These are corrections to the primary trend. Think of this as a minor
counter reaction to the larger movement in the market. Example –
corrections in the bull market, rallies & recoveries in the bear
market. The counter trend can last anywhere between a few
weeks to several months

05

Minor Trends/Daily
fluctuations

These are daily fluctuations in the market, some traders prefer to
call them market noise

All Indices must confirm with
each other

We cannot confirm a trend based on just one index. For example
the market is said to be bullish only if CNX Nifty, CNX Nifty Midcap,
CNX Nifty Smallcap etc all move in the same upward direction. It
would not be possible to classify markets as bullish, just by the
action of CNX Nifty alone

Volumes must confirm

The volumes must confirm along with price. The trend should be
supported by volume. In an uptrend the volume must increase as
the price rises and should reduce as the price falls. In a downtrend,
volume must increase when the price falls and decrease when the
price rises. You could refer chapter 12 for more details on volume

03

06

07

137

08

Sideway markets can
substitute secondary
markets

Markets may remain sideways (trading between a range) for an
extended period. Example:- Reliance Industries between 2010 and
2013 was trading between 860 and 990. The sideways markets can
be a substitute for a secondary trend

09

The closing price is the most
sacred

Between the open, high, low and close prices, the close is the most
important price level as it represents the final evaluation of the
stock during the day

17.2 – The different phases of Market

Dow Theory suggests the markets are made up of three distinct phases, which are
self repeating. These are called the Accumulation phase, the Mark up phase, and the
Distribution phase.
The Accumulation phase usually occurs right after a steep sell off in the market. The
steep sell off in the markets would have frustrated many market participants, losing
hope of any sort of uptrend in prices. The stock prices would have plummeted to
rock bottom valuations, but the buyers would still be hesitant of buying fearing
there could be another sell off. Hence the stock price languishes at low levels. This is
when the ‘Smart Money’ enters the market.
Smart money is usually the institutional investors who invest from a long term
perspective. They invariably seek value investments which is available after a steep
sell off. Institutional investors start to acquire shares regularly, in large quantities
over an extended period of time. This is what makes up an accumulation phase.
This also means that the sellers who are trying to sell during the accumulation
phase will easily find buyers, and therefore the prices do not decline further. Hence
invariably the accumulation phase marks the bottom of the markets. More often

138

than not, this is how the support levels are created. Accumulation phase can last up
to several months.
Once the institutional investors (smart money) absorb all the available stocks, short
term traders sense the occurrence of a support. This usually coincides with
improved business sentiment. These factors tend to take the stock price higher. This
is called the mark up phase. During the Mark up phase, the stock price rallies
quickly and sharply. The most important feature of the mark up phase is the speed.
Because the rally is quick, the public at large is left out of the rally. New investors are
mesmerized by the return and everyone from the analysts to the public see higher
levels ahead.
Finally when the stock price reaches new highs (52 week high, all time high)
everyone around would be talking about the stock market. The news reports turn
optimistic, business environment suddenly appears vibrant, and everyone one
(public) wants to invest in the markets. The public by and large, wants to get
involved in the markets as there is a positive sentiment. This is when the
distribution phase occurs.
The judicious investors (smart investors) who got in early (during the accumulation
phase) will start offloading their shares slowly. The public will absorb all the volumes
off loaded by the institutional investors (smart money) there by giving them the well
needed price support. The distribution phase has similar price properties as that of
the accumulation phase. In the distribution phase, whenever the prices attempt to
go higher, the smart money off loads their holdings. Over a period of time this
action repeats several times and thus the resistance level is created.
Finally when the institutional investors (smart money) completely sell off their
holdings, there would no further support for prices, and hence what follows after
the distribution phase is a complete sell off in the markets, also known as the mark
down of prices. The selloff in the market leaves the public in an utter state of
frustration.
Completing the circle, what follows the selloff phase is a fresh round of
accumulation phase, and the whole cycle repeats again. It is believed that that entire
cycle from accumulation phase to the selloff spans over a few years.
It is important to note that no two market cycles are the same. For example in the
Indian context the bull market of 2006 – 07 is way different from the bull market of
2013-14. Sometimes the market moves from the accumulation to the distribution
phase over a prolonged multi-year period. On the other hand, the same move from
the accumulation to the distribution can happen over a few months. The market
participant needs to tune himself to the idea of evaluating markets in the context of
different phases, as this sets a stage for developing a view on the market.

139

17.3 – The Dow Patterns
Like in candlesticks, there are few important patterns in Dow Theory as well. The
trader can use these patterns to identify trading opportunities. Some of the patterns
that we will study are:
1. The Double bottom & Double top formation
2. The Triple Bottom & Triple Top
3. Range formation, and
4. Flag formation
The support and resistance is also a core concept for the Dow Theory, but because
of its importance (in terms of placing targets and stop loss) we have discussed it
much earlier a chapter dedicated to it.

17.4 – The Double bottom and top formation
A double top & double bottom is considered a reversal pattern. A double bottom
occurs when the price of a stock hits a particular low price level and rebounds back
with a quick recovery. Following the price recovery the stock trades at a higher level
(relative to the low price) for at least 2 weeks (well spaced in time). After which the
stock attempts to hit back to the low price previously made. If the stock holds up
once again and rebounds, then a double bottom is formed.
A double bottom formation is considered bullish, and hence one should look at
buying opportunities. Here is a chart that shows a double bottom formation in Cipla
Limited:

Notice the time interval between the two bottom formations. It is evident that the
price level was well spaced in time.
Likewise in a double top formation, the stock attempts to hit the same high price
twice but eventually sells off. Of course the time gap between the two attempts of
crossing the high should at least be 2 weeks. In the chart below (Cairn India Ltd), we
can notice the double top at 336 levels. On close observation you will notice the first

140

top was around Rs.336, and the second top was around Rs.332. With some amount
of flexibility a small difference such as this should be considered alright.

From my own trading experience, I find both double tops and double bottoms very
useful while trading. I always look for opportunities where the double formation
coincides with a recognizable candlesticks formation.
For instance, imagine a situation where in the double top formation, the 2nd top
forms a bearish pattern such as shooting star. This means, both from the Dow
Theory and candlestick perspective there is consensus to sell; hence the conviction
to take the trade is higher.

17.5 – The triple top and bottom
As you may have guessed, a triple formation is similar to a double formation, except
that the price level is tested thrice as opposed twice in a double bottom. The
interpretation of the triple formation is similar to the double formation.
As a rule of thumb the more number of times the price tests, and reacts to a certain
price level, the more sacred the price level is considered. Therefore by virtue of this,
the triple formation is considered more powerful than the double formation.
The following chart shows a triple top formation for DLF Limited. Notice the sharp
sell off after testing the price level for the 3rd time, thus completing the triple top.

141

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. Dow Theory was used in the western world even before candlesticks were formally
introduced
2. Dow Theory works on 9 basic tenets
3. Market can be viewed in 3 basic phases – accumulation, mark up, and distribution
phase
4. The accumulation phase is when the institutional investor (smart money) enters the
market, mark up phase is when traders make an entry, and the final distribution
phase is when the larger public enter the market
5. What follows the distribution phase is the mark down phase, following which the
accumulation phase will complete the circle
6. The Dow theory has a few basic patterns, which are best used in conjunction with
candlesticks
7. The double and triple formations are reversal patterns, which are quite effective
8. The interpretation of double and triple formations are the same

142

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 18

The Dow Theory (Part 2)
91

18.1 – Trading Range
The concept of range is a natural extension to the double and triple formation. In a
range, the stock attempts to hit the same upper and lower price level multiple times
for an extended period of time. This is also referred to as the sideways market. As
the price oscillates in a narrow range without forming a particular trend, it is called a
sideways market or sideways drift. So, when both the buyers and sellers are not
confident about the market direction, the price would typically move in a range, and
hence typical long term investors would find the markets a bit frustrating during this
period.
However the range provides multiple opportunities to trade both ways (long and
short) with reasonable accuracy for a short term trader. The upside is capped by
resistance and the downside by the support. Thus it is known as a range bound
market or a trading market as there are enough opportunities for both the buyers
and the sellers.
In the chart below you can see the stock’s behaviour in a typical range:

As you can see the stock hit the same upper (Rs.165) and the same lower (Rs.128)
level multiple times, and continued to trade within the range. The area between the
upper and lower level is called the width of the range. One of the easy trades to
initiate in such a scenario would be to buy near the lower level, and sell near the
higher level. In fact the trade can be both ways with the trader opting to short at the
higher level and buying it back at the lower level.

143

In fact the chart above is a classic example of blending Dow Theory with candlestick
patterns. Starting from left, notice the encircled candles:
1. The bullish engulfing pattern is suggesting a long
2. Morning doji star suggesting a long
3. Bearish engulfing pattern is suggesting a short
4. Bearish harami pattern is suggesting a short
The short term trader should not miss out such trades, as these are easy to identify
trading opportunities with high probability of being profitable. The duration of the
range can be anywhere between a few weeks to a couple of years. The longer the
duration of the range the longer is the width of the range.

18.2 – The range breakout
Stocks do breakout of the range after being in the range for a long time. Before we
explore this, it is interesting to understand why stocks trade in the range in the first
place.
Stocks can trade in the range for two reasons:
1. When there are no meaningful fundamental triggers that can move the stock –
These triggers are usually quarterly/ annual result announcement, new products
launches, new geographic expansions, change in management, joint ventures,
mergers, acquisitions etc. When there is nothing exciting or nothing bad about the
company the stock tends to trade in a trading range. The range under these
circumstances could be quite long lasting until a meaningful trigger occurs
2. In anticipation of a big announcement – When market anticipates a big corporate
announcement the stock can swing in either directions based on the outcome of the
announcement. Till the announcement is made both buyers and sellers would be
hesitant to take action and hence the stock gets into the range. The range under

144

such circumstances can be short-lived lasting until the announcement (event) is
made.
The stock after being in the range can break out of the range. The range breakout
more often than not indicates the start of a new trend. The direction in which the
stock will breakout depends on the nature of the trigger or the outcome of the
event. What is more important is the breakout itself, and the trading opportunity it
provides.
A trader will take a long position when the stock price breaks the resistance levels
and will go short after the stock price breaks the support level.
Think of the range as an enclosed compression chamber where the pressure builds
up on each passing day. With a small vent, the pressure eases out with a great force.
This is how the breakout happens. However, the trader needs to be aware of the
concept of a ‘false breakout’.
A false breakout happens when the trigger is not strong enough to pull the stock in
a particular direction. Loosely put, a false breakout happens when a ‘not so trigger
friendly event’ occurs and impatient retail market participants react to it. Usually the
volumes are low on false range breakouts indicating, there is no smart money
involved in the move. After a false breakout, the stock usually falls back within the
range.
A true breakout has two distinct characteristics:
1. Volumes are high and
2. After the breakout, the momentum (rate of change of price) is high
Have a look at the chart below:

The stock attempted to breakout of the range three times, however the first two
attempts were false breakouts. The first 1st breakout (starting from left) was

145

characterized by low volumes, and low momentum. The 2nd breakout was
characterized by impressive volumes but lacked momentum.
However the 3rd breakout had the classic breakout attributes i.e high volumes and
high momentum.

18.3 – Trading the range breakout
Traders buy the stock as soon as the stock breaks out of the range on good
volumes. Good volumes confirm just one of the prerequisite of the range breakout.
However, there is no way for the trader to figure out if the momentum (second
prerequisite) will continue to build. Hence, the trader should always have a stoploss
for range breakout trades.
For example – Assume the stock is trading in a range between Rs.128 and Rs.165.
The stock breaks out of the range and surges above Rs.165 and now trades at
Rs.170. Then trader would be advised to go long 170 and place a stoploss at Rs.165.
Alternatively assume the stock breaks out at Rs.128 (also called the breakdown) and
trades at Rs.123. The trader can initiate a short trade at Rs.123 and treat the level of
Rs.128 as the stoploss level.
After initiating the trade, if the breakout is genuine then the trader can expect a
move in the stock which is at least equivalent to the width of the range. For example
with the breakout at Rs.168, the minimum target expectation would be 43 points
since the width is 168 – 125 = 43. This translates to a price target of Rs.168+43 = 211.

18.4 – The Flag formation
The flag formation usually takes place when the stock posts a sustained rally with
almost a vertical or a steep increase in stock prices. Flag patterns are marked by a
big move which is followed by a short correction. In the correction phase, the price
would generally move within two parallel lines. Flag pattern takes the shape of a
parallelogram or a rectangle and they have the appearance of a flag on the pole.
The price decline can last anywhere between 5 and 15 trading session.

146

With these two events (i.e price rally, and price decline) occurring consecutively a
flag formation is formed. When a flag forms, the stock invariably spurts back all of a
sudden and continues to rally upwards.
For a trader who has missed the opportunity to buy the stock, the flag formation
offers a second chance to buy. However the trader has to be quick in taking the
position as the stock tends to move up all of a sudden. In the chart above the
sudden upward moved is quite evident.
The logic behind the flag formation is fairly simple. The steep rally in the stock offers
an opportunity for market participants to book profits. Invariably, the retail
participants who are happy with the recent gains in the stock start booking profits
by selling the stock. This leads to a decline in the stock price. As only the retail
participants are selling, the volumes are on the lower side. The smart money is still
invested in the stock, and hence the sentiment is positive for the stock. Many
traders see this as an opportunity to buy the stock and hence the price rallies all of
a sudden.

18.5 – The Reward to Risk Ratio (RRR)
The concept of reward to risk ratio (RRR) is generic and not really specific to Dow
Theory. It would have been apt to discuss this under ‘trading systems and Risk
management’. However RRR finds its application across every type of trading, be it
trades based on technical analysis or investments through fundamentals. For this
reason we will discuss the concept of RRR here.
The calculation of the reward to risk ratio is very simple. Look at the details of this
short term long trade:
Entry: 55.75
Stop loss: 53.55
Expected target: 57.20
On the face of it, considering it is a short term trade, the trade looks alright.
However, let us inspect this further:

147

What is the risk the trader is taking? – [Entry – Stoploss] i.e 55.75 – 53.55 = 2.2
What is the reward the trader is expecting? – [Exit – Entry] i.e 57.2 – 55.75 = 1.45
This means for a reward of 1.45 points the trader is risking 2.2 points or in other
words the Reward to Risk ratio is 1.45/2.2 = 0.65. Clearly this is not a great trade.
A good trade should be characterised by a rich RRR. In other words, for every Rs.1/you risk on a trade your expected return should be at least Rs.1.3/- or higher,
otherwise it is simply not a worth the risk.
For example consider this long trade:
Entry: 107
Stop loss: 102
Expected target: 114
In this trade the trader is risking Rs.5/- (107 – 102) for an expected reward of Rs.7/(114 – 107). RRR in this case is 7/5 = 1.4. This means for every Rs.1/- of risk the
trader is assuming, he is expecting Rs.1.4 as reward. Not a bad deal.
The minimum RRR threshold should be set by each trader based on his/her risk
appetite. For instance, I personally don’t like to take up trades with a RRR of less
than 1.5. Some aggressive traders don’t mind a RRR of 1, meaning for every Rs.1
they risk they expect a reward of Rs.1. Some would prefer the RRR to be at least
1.25. Ultra cautious traders would prefer their RRR to be upwards of 2, meaning for
every Rs.1/- of risk they would expect at least Rs.2 as reward.
A trade must qualify the trader’s RRR requirement. Remember a low RRR is just not
worth the trade. Ultimately if RRR is not satisfied then even a trade that looks
attractive must be dropped as it is just not worth the risk.
To give you a perspective think about this hypothetical situation:
A bearish engulfing pattern has been formed, right at the top end of a trade. The
point at which the bearish engulfing pattern has formed also marks a double top
formation. The volumes are very attractive as they are at least 30% more than the
10 day average volumes. Near the bearish engulfing patterns high the chart is
showing a medium term support.
In the above situation, everything seems perfectly aligned to short trade. Assume
the trade details are as below:
Entry: 765.67
Stop loss: 772.85
Target: 758.5
Risk: 7.18 (772.85 – 765.67) i.e [Stoploss – Entry]
Reward: 7.17 (765.67 – 758.5) i.e [Entry – Exit]
RRR: 7.17/7.18 = ~ 1.0

148

As I mentioned earlier, I do have a stringent RRR requirement of at least 1.5. For this
reason even though the trade above looks great, I would be happy to drop it and
move on to scout the next opportunity.
As you may have guessed by now, RRR finds a spot in the checklist.

18.6 – The Grand Checklist
Having covered all the important aspects of Technical Analysis, we now need to
look at the checklist again and finalize it. As you may have guessed Dow Theory
obviously finds a place in the checklist as it provides another round of confirmation
to initiate the trade.
1. The stock should form a recognisable candlestick pattern
2. S&R should confirm to the trade. The stoploss price should be around S&R
1. For a long trade, the low of the pattern should be around the support
2. For a short trade, the high of the pattern should be around the resistance
3. Volumes should confirm
1. Ensure above average volumes on both buy and sell day
2. Low volumes are not encouraging, and hence do feel free to hesitate while taking
trade where the volumes are low
4. Look at the trade from the Dow Theory perspective.
1. Primary, secondary trends
2. Double, triple, range formations
3. Recognisable Dow formation
5. Indicators should confirm
1. Scale the trade size higher if indicators confirm to your plan of action
2. If the indicators do not confirm go ahead with the original plan
6. RRR should be satisfactory
1. Think about your risk appetite and identify your RRR threshold
2. For a complete beginner, I would suggest the RRR to be as high as possible as this
provides a margin of safety
3. For an active trader, I would suggest a RRR of at least 1.5
When you identify a trading opportunity, always look how the trade is positioned
from the Dow Theory perspective. For example if you are considering a long trade
based on candlesticks, then look at what the primary and secondary trend is
suggesting. If the primary trend is bullish, then it would be a good sign, however if
we are in the secondary trend (which is counter to the primary) then you may want
to think twice as the immediate trend is counter to the long trade.

149

If you follow the checklist mentioned above and completely understand its
importance, I can assure you that your trading will improve multiple folds. So the
next time you take a trade, ensure you comply with above checklist. If not for
anything, at least you will have no reason to initiate a trade based on loose and
unscientific logic.

18.7 – What next?
We have covered many aspects of technical analysis in this module. I can assure you
the topics covered here are good enough to put you on a strong platform. You may
believe there is a need to explore other patterns and indicators that we have not
discussed here. If we have not discussed a pattern or an indicator here on Varsity,
do remember it is for a specific purpose. So be assured that you have all that you
need to begin your journey with Technical analysis.
If you can devote time to understanding each one of these topics thoroughly, then
you can be certain about developing a strong TA based thinking framework. The
next logical progression from here would be to explore ideas behind back testing
trading strategies, risk management, and trading psychology. All of which we will
cover in the subsequent modules.
In the next concluding chapter, we will discuss few practical aspects that will help
you get started with Technical Analysis.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. A range is formed when the stock oscillates between the two price points
2. A trader can buy at the lower price point, and sell at the higher price point
3. The stock gets into a range for a specific reason such as the lack of fundamental
triggers, or event expectation
4. The stock can break out of the range. A good breakout is characterized by above
average volumes and sharp surge in prices
5. If the trader has missed an opportunity to buy a stock, the flag formation offers
another window to buy
6. RRR is a critical parameter for trade evaluation. Develop a minimum RRR threshold
based on your risk appetite
7. Before initiating a trade the trader should look at the opportunity from the Dow
Theory perspective

150

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 19

The Finale – Helping you get started
458

19.1 – The Charting Software
Over the last 18 chapters we have learnt many aspects of Technical Analysis. If you
have read through all the chapters and understood what is being discussed, you are
certainly at a stage where you can start trading based on Technical Analysis. The
objective of this chapter is to help you get started with identifying technical trading
opportunities.
Kindly note, the suggestions I have put forth in this chapter are based on my trading
experience.
To begin with, you need a chart visualization software, simply called the ‘Charting
Software’. The charting software helps you look at the various stock charts and
analyze the same. Needless to say, the charting software is a very important tool for
a technical analyst.
There are many charting software’s available. The two most popular ones are
‘Metastock’ and ‘Amibroker’. Majority of the technical analysts use one of the two
charting software’s. Needless to say, these are paid software’s and you need to
purchase the software license before using it.
There are a few online free charting tools that are available which you can use –
these are available on Yahoo Finance, Google Finance and pretty much all the
business media websites. However, my advice to you is – if you aspire to become a
technical analyst, get access to a good charting software.
Think of the charting software as a DVD player, once you have a DVD player
installed, you will still need to rent DVDs to watch movies. Similarly, once you have a

151

charting software installed, you will still need to feed it with data to actually view the
charts. The data feed required is provided by the data vendors.
There are many data vendors in India giving you access to data feeds. I would
suggest you look up on the internet for reliable vendors. You just need to inform
the data vendor which charting software you have, and he will provide you the data
feeds in a format that is compatible with your charting software. Of course, the data
feeds come at a cost. Once you sign up with a data vendor, he will first give you all
the historical data, after which you will have to update the data from his server on a
daily basis to stay current.
From my experience buying the latest version of a good charting software
(Metastock or Amibroker) can cost you a onetime fee of anywhere between
Rs.25,000/- and Rs.30,000/-. Add to this another Rs.15,000/- to Rs.25,000 towards
the data feeds. Of course, while the software cost is one time, the cost of data feeds
recurs annually. Do note, the older versions of the charting software may cost you
much lesser.
Now, if you are in no mood to spend so much for the charting software & data feed
combination there is another alternative. And that would be Zerodha’s Pi.
As you may know, Zerodha has a proprietary trading terminal called ‘Pi’. Pi helps you
in many ways; I would like to draw your attention to some of its features in the
context of Technical Analysis:
1. It is bundled – Pi is a charting software and a data feed package bundled into a
single software
2. Great Visualizations – Pi helps you visualize charts across multiple time frames
including intraday charts
3. Advanced Features – Pi has advanced charting features and includes 80 built-in
technical indicators and over 30 drawing tools
4. Scripting you strategy – Pi has a scripting language employing which you can code
technical strategies and back test the same on historical data. Do note, on Varsity
we will soon include a module on building trading strategies and scripting
5. Easy Opportunity Recognition – Pi has pattern recognition feature that lets you
draw a pattern on the screen. Once you draw, just command Pi to scout for that
pattern across the market and it will do just that for you
6. Trade from Pi – Pi also lets you execute trades directly from the chart (a huge plus
point for a technical trader)
7. Data Dump – Pi has a massive historical data dump (over 50,000 candles) which
means back testing your strategy will be more efficient
8. Your personal trading assistant – Pi’s ‘Expert Advisor’, keeps you informed about
the patterns being developed in the live markets

152

9. Super Advanced features – Pi has Artificial Intelligence and Genetic Algorithms.
These are optimisation tools which helps you optimize your trading algorithms
10. It is free – Zerodha is giving it free of cost to all its active traders
The list is quite exhaustive ranging from the basic to advanced features. I would
strongly suggest you try out Pi before you decide to venture out for charting
package and data feed bundle.

19.2 – Which timeframe to choose?
We discussed ‘Timeframes in chapter 3. I would request you to read through it again
to refresh your memory.
Selecting the timeframe while scanning for trading opportunities is perhaps one of
the biggest confusion a newbie technical analyst has. There are many timeframes
you can choose from – 1 minute, 5 minutes, 10 minutes, 15 minutes, EOD, Weekly,
Monthly, and Yearly. It is quite easy to get confused with this.
As a thumb rule, the higher the timeframe, the more reliable the trading signal is.
For example a ‘Bullish Engulfing’ pattern on the 15 minute timeframe is far more
reliable than a ‘Bullish Engulfing’ pattern on a 5 minute timeframe. So keeping this
in perspective, one has to choose a timeframe based on the intended length of the
trade.
So how do you decide your intended length of your trade?
If you are starting out fresh or if you are not a seasoned trader I would suggest you
avoid day trading. Start with trades with an intention to hold the trade for a few
days. This is called ‘Positional Trading’ or ‘Swing Trading’. An active swing trader
usually keeps his trading position open for a few days. The best look back period for
a swing trader is 6 months to 1 year.
On the other hand, a scalper is a seasoned day trader; typically he uses 1minute or
5 minutes timeframe.
Once you are comfortable with holding trades over multiple days, graduate yourself
to ‘Day Trading’. My guess is, your transition from a positional trader to a day trader

153

will take some time. Needless to say for a dedicated and disciplined trader, the
transition period is remarkably lesser.

19.3 – Look back period
Look back period is simply the number of candles you wish to view before taking a
trading decision. For instance, a look back period of 3 months means you are
looking at today’s candle in the backdrop of at least the recent 3 months data. By
doing this you will develop a perspective on today’s price action with reference to
last 3 months price action.
For swing trading opportunities, what is the ideal look back period? From my
experience, I would suggest that a swing trader should look for at least 6 months to
1 year data. Likewise a scalper is better off looking at last 5 days data.
However, while plotting the S&R levels you should increase the look back period to
at least 2 years.

19.4 – The opportunity universe
There are roughly about 6000 listed stocks in the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) and
close to about 2000 listed stocks in the National Stock Exchange (NSE). Does it make
sense for you to scan for opportunities across these thousands of stocks, on a daily
basis? Obviously not. Over a period of time you need to identify a set of stocks that
you are comfortable trading. These set of stocks would constitute your “Opportunity

154

Universe’. On a daily basis you scan your opportunity universe to identify trading
opportunities.
Here are some pointers to select stocks to build your opportunity universe:
1. Ensure the stock has adequate liquidity. One way to ensure adequate liquidity is to
look at the bid ask spread. The lesser the spread, the more liquid the stock
1. Alternatively you can have ‘minimum volume criteria’. For example you can consider
only those stocks where the volume per day is at least 500000
2. Make sure the stock is in the ‘EQ’ segment. This is basically because stocks in the ‘EQ’
segment can be day traded. I agree, I discouraged day trading for a newbie,
however in a situation where you initiated a positional trade and the target is
achieved the same day, there is no harm in closing the position intraday
3. This is a bit tricky, but make sure the stock is not operator driven. Unfortunately
there is no quantifiable method to identify operator driven stocks. This comes to
you by sheer experience
If you find it difficult to find stocks that comply with the above points, I would advise
you to simply stick to the Nifty 50 or the Sensex 30 stocks. These are called the
index stocks. Index stocks are carefully selected by the exchanges, this selection
process ensures they comply with many points including the ones mentioned
above.
Keeping Nifty 50 as your opportunity universe is probably a good idea for both
swing trader and scalper.

19.5 – The Scout
Let us now proceed to understand how one should go about selecting stocks for
trading. In other words, we will try and indentify a process, employing which we can
scan for trading opportunities. The process is mainly suited for a swing trader.
We have now set the 4 important aspects –
1. The charting software – Suggest you use Zerodha’s Pi
2. Timeframe – End of Day data

155

3. Opportunity Universe – Nifty 50 stocks
4. Trade type – Positional trades with an option to square off intraday, provided the
target hits the same day
5. Look back period – Between 6 months to 1 year. Increase to 2 years while plotting
the S&R level
Having fixed these important practical aspects, I will now proceed to share my
methodology of scanning trading opportunities. I have divided the process into 2
parts:
Part 1 – The Short listing process
1. I look at the chart of all the stocks within my opportunity universe
2. While looking at the chart, my attention is only on the recent 3 or maximum 4
candles
3. While looking at the recent 3 candles, I check if there is any recognisable candlestick
pattern being developed
4. If I find an interesting pattern, I short list this stock for further investigation and I
continue the scouting process. I always ensure I check all the 50 charts
Part 2 – The Evaluation process
At this stage, I am usually left with 4-5 shortlisted stocks (out of the 50 stocks in my
opportunity universe) which exhibit a recognisable candlestick pattern. I then
proceed to evaluate these 4-5 charts in detail. Typically I spend at least 15 – 20
minutes on each chart. Here is what I do when looking at the shortlisted chart:
1. I generally look at how strong the pattern is – I am specifically interested in checking
if there is any need for me to be more flexible
1. For example, if a Bullish Marubuzo has a shadow, I evaluate the length of the
shadow with reference to the range
2. After this I look at the ‘prior trend’. For all bullish patterns, the prior trend should be
a downtrend, and for all bearish patterns the prior trend should be an uptrend. I do
pay a lot of attention to prior trends
3. At this stage if everything looks good (i.e. I have identified a recognizable pattern
with a well defined prior trend), I proceed to inspect the chart further
4. After this I look at the volumes. The volume should be at least equal to or more than
the 10 day average volume
5. Provided both the candlestick pattern and volumes confirm, I then proceed to check
the existence of the support (in case of a long trade) and resistance (in case of a
short trade) level
1. The S&R level should coincide (as much as possible) with the stoploss of the trade
(as defined by the candlestick pattern)

156

2. If the S&R level is more than 4% away from the stoploss, I stop evaluating the chart
further and proceed to the next chart
6. I then look for Dow patterns – particularly for double and triple top & bottom
formations, flags formations and the possibility of a range breakout
1. Needless to say, I also establish the Primary and secondary market trend
7. If the steps 1 to 5 are satisfactory, I proceed to calculate the risk to reward ratio
(RRR)
1. To calculate RRR, I first establish the target by plotting either the support or
resistance level
2. The minimum RRR should be at least 1.5
8. At last I look at the MACD and RSI indicators to get a perspective, if they confirm and
if I have spare cash I increase my trade size
Usually out of the 4-5 shortlisted stocks, at the most 1 or 2 may qualify for a trade.
There are days when there are no trading opportunities. Deciding not to trade in
itself is a big trading decision. Do remember this is a fairly stringent checklist, if a
stock is confirming to the checklist, my conviction to trade is very high.
I have mentioned this many times in this module, I will mention this for one last
time – once you place a trade, do nothing till either your target is achieved or
stoploss is triggered. Of course you can trail your stoploss, which is a healthy
practice. But otherwise do nothing, if your trade complies with the checklist and do
remember the trade is highly curetted; hence the chance of being successful is high.
So it makes sense to stay put with conviction.

19.5 – The Scalper
For a seasoned swing trader, scalping is another option. Scalping is a technique
where the trader initiates a fairly large trade with an intention of holding the trade
for a few minutes. Here is a typical example of the trade done by a scalper –

1st Leg of the trade

2nd leg of the trade

157

Time – 10:15 AM

Time – 10:25 AM

Stock – Infosys

Stock – Infosys

Price – 3980

Price – 3976

Action – Sell

Action – Buy

Quantity – 1000 shares

Quantity – 1000 shares

Overall profit after applicable charges = Rs.2653/Do note, the overall profit is calculated considering that you are trading with
Zerodha, the overall profitability would shrink remarkably if you are scalping with an
expensive brokerage rates. Containing transaction charges is one of the keys to
successful scalping.
A scalper is a highly focused trader with a sharp sense for price. He utilizes highly
precise charts such with 1 minute and 5 minute timeframe to make his trading
decisions. A successful scalper executes many such trades within the day. His
objective is simple – large quantity trade with an intention to hold for a few minutes.
He intends to profit from the small moves in the stock.
If you aspire to be a scalper, here are few guidelines –
1. Do remember the checklist we have mentioned but do not expect all the checklist
items to comply as the trade duration is very low
2. If I were to handpick just 1 or 2 items in the checklist for scalping, it would be
candlestick pattern and volume
3. A risk reward ratio of even 0.5 to 0.75 is acceptable while scalping
4. Scalping should be done only on liquid stocks
5. Have an effective risk management system – be really quick to book a loss if need
be
6. Keep a tab on the bid ask spread to see how the volumes are building
7. Keep a tab on global markets – for example if there is a sudden drop in the Hang
Seng (Hong Kong stock exchange) it invariably leads to a sudden drop in local
markets
8. Choose a low cost broker to ensure your costs are controlled

158

9. Use margins effectively, do not over leverage
10. Have a reliable intraday charting software
11. If you sense the day is going wrong, stop trading and move away from your terminal
Scalping as a day trading technique requires a great presence of mind and a
machine like approach. A successful scalper embraces volatility and is indifferent to
market swings.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. If you aspire to become a technical trader ensure you equip yourself with good
charting software. Zerodha’s Pi is my preference
2. Choose EOD chart for both day trading and swing trading
3. Look at intraday charts if you like scalping the markets
4. The look back period should be at least 6 months to 1 year for swing trading
5. Nifty 50 is a great opportunity universe to begin with
6. The opportunity scanning can be done in 2 parts
7. Part 1 involves skimming through the charts of all the stocks in opportunity universe
and short listing those charts that display a recognizable candlestick pattern
8. Part 2 involves investigating the shortlisted charts to figure out if they comply with
the checklist
9. Scalping is advisable for seasoned swing traders

159

Module 2 — Technical Analysis
Chapter 20

Supplementary Notes 1
354

Average Directional Index (ADX)
About:
The Average Directional Index (ADX), Minus Directional Indicator (-DI) and Plus
Directional Indicator (+DI) represent a group of directional movement indicators
that form a trading system developed by Welles Wilder. The Average Directional
Index (ADX) measures trend strength without regard to trend direction. The other
two indicators, Plus Directional Indicator (+DI) and Minus Directional Indicator (-DI),
complement ADX by defining trend direction. Used together, chartists can
determine both the direction and strength of the trend. Source: stockcharts.com
What should you know?
1. ADX system has three components – ADX, +DI, and -DI
2. ADX is used to measure the strength/weakness of the trend and not the actual
direction
3. ADX above 25 indicates that the present trend is strong, ADX below 20 suggest that
the trend lacks strength. ADX between 20 and 25 is a grey area
4. A buy signal is generated when ADX is 25 and the +DI crosses over –DI
5. A sell signal is generated when ADX is 25 and the –DI crosses over +DI

160

6. Once the buy or sell signal is generated, take the trade by defining the stop loss
7. The stop loss is usually the low of the signal candle (for buy signals) and the high of
the signal candles ( for short signals)
8. The trade stays valid till the stoploss is breached (even if the +DI and –DI reverses
the crossover)
9. The default look back period for ADX is 14 days
On Kite:
Load the ADX indicator from studies. Kite gives you an option to change the look
back period, by default the look back period is set

You can customize the color of all the three components of the ADX system. Click on
‘create’ to load the indicator –

161

By default the ADX indicator is loaded below the instrument. The black line
represents ADX, ensure it is above 25 while looking for the crossovers.

Alligator Indicator
About:
An indicator designed to signal a trend absence, formation and direction. Bill
Williams saw the alligator’s behavior as an allegory of the market’s one: the resting
phase is turning into the price-hunting as the alligator awakes so that to come back
to sleep after the feeding is over. The longer the alligator is sleeping the hungrier it
gets and the stronger the market move will be. Source: infimarkets.com
What should you know?
1. The Alligator indicator is overlaid on the price chart
2. The indicator is made up of three simple moving averages – 13, 8, and 5 period
averages are used
3. The 13 period MA refers to the Alligator’s jaw, 8 period MA refers to the Alligator’s
teeth, and the 5 period MA refers to the Alligator’s lips
4. By default 13 MA is colored blue, 8 MA is colored red, and 5 MA is colored green
5. A buy signal is generated when the following condition is satisfied –
1. All three MA’s are separated
2. The price is above the 5MA, 5MA is above 8MA, and 8MA is above 13 MA
3. Once the above condition is satisfied, it means that the asset is trending up

162

4. When the uptrend is established, it is upto the trader to identify a good entry point
within this trend
6. A sell signal is generated when the following condition is satisfied –
1. All three MA’s are separated
2. The price is below the 5MA, 5MA is below 8MA, and 8MA is below 13 MA
3. Once the above condition is satisfied, it means that the asset is trending down
4. When the downtrend is established, it is upto the trader to identify a good entry
point within this trend
7. Periods when the 13, 8, and 5 MA are intervened (or moving flat) is considered a ‘no
trader’ zone and therefore the trader is advised to stay out of markets
On Kite:
Load the Alligator indicator from the studies. As you can see the default values of
the moving averages are loaded i.e 13, 8, and 5.

As you can see, the indicator input also loads the ‘offset’ values for each MA. These
offset values are also loaded by default values. Offsetting or displacing the moving
average reduces the number of whipsaws in the average. Needless to say that you
can change the default values for moving average and offset to any value that you
deem appropriate. Further you can even customize the color of each indicator to
your preference.
Here is the snapshot of how the indicator looks when the indicator is overlaid on the
chart. Do notice there are 2 instances when the sell condition is satisfied
(highlighted in red) and 1 instance when the buy condition is satisfied (highlighted in
blue).

163

Aroon
About:
Developed by Tushar Chande in 1995, Aroon is an indicator system that determines
whether a stock is trending or not and how strong the trend is. “Aroon” means
“Dawn’s Early Light” in Sanskrit. Chande chose this name because the indicators are
designed to reveal the beginning of a new trend. The Aroon indicators measure the
number of periods since price recorded an x-day high or low. There are two
separate indicators: Aroon-Up and Aroon-Down.
A 25-day Aroon-Up measures the number of days since a 25-day high. A 25-day
Aroon-Down measures the number of days since a 25-day low. In this sense, the
Aroon indicators are quite different from typical momentum oscillators, which focus
on price relative to time. Aroon is unique because it focuses on time relative to
price. Chartists can use the Aroon indicators to spot emerging trends, identify
consolidations, define correction periods and anticipate reversals. Source:
stockcharts.com
What should you know?
1. The indicator measures the number of days since last high or low is made, hence
the indicator is a measure of time relative to the price
2. Aroon consists of two component – Aroon up and Aroon Down
3. The default value for Aroon is 25 days. Aroon up measures the number of days
since the last 25 day high occurred and Aroon down measures the number of days
since the last 25 days low has occurred
4. Both Aroon up and Aroon down are plotted side by side
5. Aroon Up/Down is lower bound to zero and upper bound to 100
6. A buy is generated when Aroon up is above 50 and Aroon low is below 30

164

7. A sell is generated when Aroon down is above 50 and Aroon up is below 30
On Kite:
Here is the snapshot of the indicator when loaded from studies –

As you can see the default period is 14, feel free to change this to any number you
wish. 14 here represent the ‘number of days’. Do remember if the period is 14, the
Aroon measures the number of days since the stock made 14 days high/low.

165

As you can see both Aroon up and Aroon Down are plotted.

Aroon Oscillator
Aroon Oscillator is an extension of the Aroon indicator. The Aroon Oscillator
measures the difference between the Aroon up and Aroon down and plots the
difference in the form of an oscillator. The oscillator swings between -100 to +100,
with the ‘0’ level as the center point.
The snapshot below shows the Aroon Oscillator loaded on to the chart –

A reading above zero means that Aroon-Up is greater than Aroon-Down, which
implies that prices are making new highs more recently than new lows. Conversely,
readings below zero indicate that Aroon-Down is greater than Aroon-Up. This
implies that prices are recording new lows more recently than new highs.
As you can see, the Aroon Oscillator is either going to be positive or negative the
vast majority of the time. This makes interpretation straight-forward. Time and price
favor an uptrend when the indicator is positive and a downtrend when the indicator
is negative. A positive or negative threshold can be used to define the strength of
the trend. For example, a surge above +50 would reflect a strong upside move,
while a plunge below -50 would indicate a strong downside move. Source:
stockcharts.com

Average True Range
About:
Developed by J. Welles Wilder, the Average True Range (ATR) is an indicator that

166

measures volatility. As with most of his indicators, Wilder designed ATR with
commodities and daily prices in mind. Commodities are frequently more volatile
than stocks. They were are often subject to gaps and limit moves, which occur when
a commodity opens up or down its maximum allowed move for the session. A
volatility formula based only on the high-low range would fail to capture volatility
from gap or limit moves. Wilder created Average True Range to capture this
“missing” volatility. It is important to remember that ATR does not provide an
indication of price direction, just volatility. Source: stockcharts.com
What should you know?
1. Average True Range (ATR) is an extension of True Range concept
2. ATR is not upper or lower bound, hence can take any value
3. ATR is stock price specific, hence for Stock 1 ATR can be in the range of 1.2 and
Stock 2 ATR could be in the range of 150
4. ATR attempts to measure the volatility situation and not really the direction of the
prices
5. ATR is used to identify stop loss as well
6. If the ATR of a stock is 48, then it means that on average the stock is likely to move
48 points either ways up or down. You can add this to the current day’s range to
estimate the day’s range. For example the stock price is 1320, then the stock is likely
to trade between 1320 – 48 = 1272 and 1320 + 48 = 1368
7. If the ATR for the next day decreases to say 40, then it means that the volatility is
decreasing, and so is the expected range for the day
8. It is best to use ATR to identify the volatility based SL while trading. Assume you
have initiated a long trade on the stock at 1325, then your SL should be at least 1272
or below since the ATR is 48
9. Likewise if you have initiated a short at 1320, then your stoploss should be at least
1368 or above
10. If these SL levels are outside your risk to reward appetite, the its best to avoid such
trade.
On Kite:
As you can see, the default value of ATR is 14, which means to say that the system
calculates the ATR for the last 14 days. Of course you can change this to any value to
wish. Here is the snapshot –

167

168

Once you load the chart, ATR is plotted below the price chart as seen below –

So the next time you place a stoploss make sure you check the ATR value to see if
stoploss level is relevant. You may also want to read more about volatility and its
application (including volatility based SL) – Click Here

Average True Range Band
The ATR bands are an extension of the ATR concept. The idea is to plot an envelope
around the stock price to evaluate if the stock prices are behaving “normally” or
trending in a particular direction. In order to do this, the ATR band calculates the
upper and lower band.
What should you know?
1. The ATR band calculates and plots the upper and lower envelope around the stock
price
2. To begin with a moving average of stock price is calculated
3. The ATR value is added to the moving average value, and this forms the upper
envelop
4. The ATR value is subtracted to the moving average value, and this forms the lower
envelop
5. If the stock price penetrates either the upper or lower envelop, then the expectation
is that the stock price will continue to move in the same direction. For example if the
stock price has penetrated above the upper envelop, the expectation is that the
stock will continue to move higher
6. You can even use the ATR bands as an alternate to the Bollinger Band trading
system. You can read more about the Bollinger Band (section 15.2)
On Kite:
When you load the ATR band from studies, you will be prompted for few inputs –

169

Period refers to the MA time frame; the default value is 5 days. You can change this
to whichever time frame that you deem suitable. We would suggest you ignore ‘shift’
parameter. For the ‘field’ option select ‘close’, this means to say that you are plotting
the MA values on the closing prices. The rest of the options are mainly aesthetic
features, feel free to explore them. Once you click create, you will see the ATR bands
plotted on the chart.

170

Super trend
Before understanding the supertrend indicator, understanding the ATR is necessary
as super trend employs ATR values to calculate the indicator values. The supertrend
indicator is plotted over the price chart of the stock or the index. The indicator line
changes its color between green and red based on the price moment in the
underlying. Super trend does not predict the direction, rather once the direction is
established it will guide you to initiate a position and suggests you to stay in the
position till the trend sustains.
What should you know?
1. When plotted, the supertrend indicator appears like a alternating green and red
continuous line
2. A buy signal is generated when the stock/index price turns greater than the
indicator value. At this stage, the indicator color turn green and you can also see a
crossover of the price versus the indicator (price greater than indicator value)
3. Once the long position has been established, the trader is advised to hold the
position till the price closes below the green line. So in a sense the green line helps
as a trailing stoploss for the long position
4. A sell signal is generated when the stock/index price turns lesser than the indicator
value. At this stage, the indicator color turn red and you can also see a crossover of
the price versus the indicator (price lesser than indicator value)
5. The sell signal can be used to initiate a fresh short or exit long. Although waiting for
the sell signal to exit the existing long position can sometime lead to taking a loss.
So the trader should use his discretion here

171

6. Once the short position has been established, the trader is advised to hold the
position till the price closes below the green line. So in a sense the red line helps as
a trailing stoploss for the short position
7. Supertrend is basically used to identify a trend therefore it works best in a trending
market
8. The supertrend indicator when compared to a regular Moving Average trading
system generates fewer false signals, for this reason the super trend indicator is
preferred over a Moving Average trading system
On Kite:
When you select Supertrend indicator from the list of studies you will be prompted
for two inputs – Period and Multiplier.

Period refers to the ATR number of days. The default value on Kite is 7, which
means to say that the system will calculate the ATR value for the last 7 days. You can
input any value you deem suitable.
The multiplier refers to a value by which the ATR will get multiplied. The default
value on Kite is 3, so whatever is the value of ATR, it will get multiplied by 3.
Multiplier is a crucial input for Super trend. If the multiplier value is too high, then
lesser number of signals are generated. Likewise if the multiplier value is too small,
then the frequency of signals increase, hence chances of generating false trading
signals are quite high. I would suggest you keep this value between 3 and 4.

172

Once the indicator is plotted, this is how it appears on the chart –

Notice how the indicator changes the color as the price moves. Also, whenever the
buy/sell signal is generated green and red arrows are generated (respectively)
prompting the trader to go long or short on the stock.

Volume weighted average price (VWAP)
VWAP is one of the one of the simplest indicators to use. It works on the principle of
averaging the traded price in terms of volume traded. Let me give you an example
of to help you understand this better.
Here is how Infy traded between 14:30 and 14:35 on 2nd Nov 2016 –

The data is quite simple to understand, for example, at 14:32, 2475 shares were
traded, it made a high of 983.95, low of 983, and closed the minute at 983.1.

173

Now, we use this data and compute the VWAP price. In order to do this, we calculate
the following –
1. Typical price = which is the average price of High, Low, and close
2. Volume Price (VP) = we get this by multiplying the typical price with its volume
3. Total VP = This is a cumulative number, which is got by adding the current VP to the
previous VP
4. Total volume = This is again a cumulative number, which is got by adding the
current volume to the previous volume
5. VWAP = We get this VWAP number by dividing the Total VP by Total Volume. The
resulting number indicates the average traded price, weighted by volume.
Let’s do the math on Infy data –

As you see, the VWAP is a dynamic number, changing based on how the trades flow
in.
How to use the VWAP?
1. VWAP is an intraday indicator, use it on minute charts. Often when you plot this, you
will notice a jump at 9:15 AM, when compared to previous day’s data. Ignore this
jump as it means nothing
2. VWAP is an average and like any indicators employing averages, this too lags the
current market price
3. VWAP is used for 2 main reasons – to get a sense of intraday direction and to get a
sense of the efficiency of order execution
4. If the current price is below VWAP, then the general opinion is that the intraday
trend is down
5. If the current price is above VWAP, then the general opinion is that the stock is
trending higher
6. If the VWAP lies in between the high and low, then the expectation is that the stock
will remain volatile
7. If you intend to short a stock, then it is considered an efficient fill if you short the
stock at a price higher than VWAP

174

8. Likewise, if you intend to go long on a stock, then it is considered an efficient fill if
you go long at a price lower than VWAP
On Kite:
Open the chart of your preference and select VWAP from the studies drop down –

Note, VWAP can be applied only on intraday time frame and cannot be applied on
EOD data.
Once you select the time frame (1 min, 5 mins, 10 mins etc), the engine calculates
the VWAP and plots it on the chart as an overlay.

175

You can now visualize the VWAP and the current market price and plan your trades
accordingly.

176

