Module 3

Fundamental Analysis

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 1

Introduction to Fundamental Analysis
83

1.1 – Overview
Fundamental Analysis (FA) is a holistic approach to study a business. When an
investor wishes to invest in a business for the long term (say 3 – 5 years) it becomes
extremely essential to understand the business from various perspectives. It is
critical for an investor to separate the daily short term noise in the stock prices and
concentrate on the underlying business performance. Over the long term, the stock
prices of a fundamentally strong company tend to appreciate, thereby creating
wealth for its investors.
We have many such examples in the Indian market. To name a few, one can think of
companies such as Infosys Limited, TCS Limited, Page Industries, Eicher Motors,
Bosch India, Nestle India, TTK Prestige etc. Each of these companies have delivered
on an average over 20% compounded annual growth return (CAGR) year on year for
over 10 years. To give you a perspective, at a 20% CAGR the investor would double
his money in roughly about 3.5 years. Higher the CAGR faster is the wealth creation
process. Some companies such as Bosch India Limited have delivered close to 30%
CAGR. Therefore, you can imagine the magnitude, and the speed at which wealth is
created if one would invest in fundamentally strong companies.

1

Here are long term charts of Bosch India, Eicher Motors, and TCS Limited that can
set you thinking about long term wealth creation. Do remember these are just 3
examples amongst the many that you may find in Indian markets.

At this point you may be of the opinion that I am biased as I am selectively posting
charts that look impressive. You may wonder how the long term charts of
companies such as Suzlon Energy, Reliance Power, and Sterling Biotech may look?
Well here are the long term charts of these companies:

2

These are just 3 examples of the wealth destructors amongst the many you may
find in the Indian Markets.
The trick has always been to separate the investment grade companies which create
wealth from the companies that destroy wealth. All investment grade companies

3

have a few common attributes that sets them apart. Likewise all wealth destructors
have a few common traits which is clearly visible to an astute investor.
Fundamental Analysis is the technique that gives you the conviction to invest for a
long term by helping you identify these attributes of wealth creating companies.

1.2 – Can I be a fundamental analyst?
Of course you can be. It is a common misconception that only chartered
accountants and professionals from a commerce background can be good
fundamental analysts. This is not true at all. A fundamental analyst just adds 2 and 2
to ensure it sums up to 4. To become a fundamental analyst you will need few basic
skills:
1. Understanding the basic financial statements
2. Understand businesses with respect to the industry in which it operates
3. Basic arithmetic operations such as addition, subtraction, division, and
multiplication
The objective of this module on Fundamental Analysis is to ensure that you gain the
first two skill sets.

1.3 – I’m happy with Technical Analysis, so why bother about Fundamental
Analysis?
Technical Analysis (TA) helps you garner quick short term returns. It helps you time
the market for a better entry and exit. However TA is not an effective approach to
create wealth. Wealth is created only by making intelligent long term investments.
However, both TA & FA must coexist in your market strategy. To give you a
perspective, let me reproduce the chart of Eicher Motors:

4

Let us say a market participant identifies Eicher motors as a fundamentally strong
stock to invest, and therefore invests his money in the stock in the year 2006. As you
can see the stock made a relatively negligible move between 2006 and 2010. The
real move in Eicher Motors started only from 2010. This also means FA based
investment in Eicher Motors did not give the investor any meaningful return
between 2006 and 2010. The market participant would have been better off taking
short term trades during this time. Technical Analysis helps the investor in taking
short term trading bets. Hence both TA & FA should coexist as a part of your market
strategy. In fact, this leads us to an important capital allocation strategy called “The
Core Satellite Strategy”.
Let us say, a market participant has a corpus of Rs.500,000/-. This corpus can be
split into two unequal portions, for example the split can be 60 – 40. The 60% of
capital which is Rs.300,000/- can be invested for a long term period in fundamentally
strong companies. This 60% of the investment makes up the core of the portfolio.
One can expect the core portfolio to grow at a rate of at least 12% to 15% CAGR year
on year basis.
The balance 40% of the amount, which is Rs.200,000/- can be utilized for active short
term trading using Technical Analysis technique on equity, futures, and options. The
Satellite portfolio can be expected to yield at least 10% to 12% absolute return on a
yearly basis.

1.4 – Tools of FA
The tools required for fundamental analysis are extremely basic, most of which are
available for free. Specifically you would need the following:
1. Annual report of the company – All the information that you need for FA is available
in the annual report. You can download the annual report from the company’s
website for free

5

2. Industry related data – You will need industry data to see how the company under
consideration is performing with respect to the industry. Basic data is available for
free, and is usually published in the industry’s association website
3. Access to news – Daily News helps you stay updated on latest developments
happening both in the industry and the company you are interested in. A good
business news paper or services such as Google Alert can help you stay abreast of
the latest news
4. MS Excel – Although not free, MS Excel can be extremely helpful in fundamental
calculations
With just these four tools, one can develop fundamental analysis that can rival
institutional research. You can believe me when I say that you don’t need any other
tool to do good fundamental research. In fact even at the institutional level the
objective is to keep the research simple and logical.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. Fundamental Analysis is used to make long term investments
2. Investment in a company with good fundamentals creates wealth
3. Using Fundamental Analysis one can separate out an investment grade company
from a junk company
4. All investment grade companies exhibit few common traits. Likewise all junk
companies exhibit common traits
5. Fundamental analysis helps the analysts identify these traits
6. Both Technical analysis and fundamental analysis should coexist as a part of your
market strategy
7. To become a fundamental analyst, one does not require any special skill. Common
sense, basic mathematics, and a bit of business sense is all that is required
8. A core satellite approach to the capital allocation is a prudent market strategy
9. The tools required for FA are generally very basic, most of these tools are available
for free.

6

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 2

Mindset of an Investor
45

2.1– Speculator Vs Trader Vs Investor
Depending on how you would like to participate in the market, you can choose to
speculate, trade or invest. All the three types of participation are different from one
another. One has to take a stance on the type of market participant he would like to
be. Having clarity on this can have a huge impact on his Profit & Loss account.

To help you get this clarity, let us consider a market scenario and identify how each
one of the market participants (speculator, trader, and investor) would react to it.
SCENARIO
RBI in the next two days is expected to convene to announce their latest stance on
the monetary policy. Owing to the high and sticky inflation, RBI has hiked the
interest rates during the previous 4 monetary policy reviews. Increase in interest
rates, as we know means tougher growth prospects for Corporate India – hence
corporate earnings would take a hit.
Assume there are three market participants – Sunil, Tarun, and Girish. Each of them
view the above scenario differently, and hence would take different actions in the
market. Let us go through their thought process.
(Please note: I will briefly speak about option contracts here, this is only for
illustration purpose. We will understand more about derivatives in the subsequent
modules)

7

Sunil: He thinks through the situation and his thought process is as follows:
o

He feels the interest rate are at an unsustainably high level

o

High interest rates hampers the growth of corporate India

o

He also believes that RBI has hiked the interest rates to a record high level and it
would be really tough for RBI to hike the rate again

o

He looks at what the popular analysts on TV are opinionating about the situation,
and he is happy to note that his thoughts and the analyst thoughts are similar

o

He concludes that RBI is likely to cut the rates if not for keeping the interest rates
flat

o

As an outcome, he expects the market to go up
To put his thoughts into action, he buys call options of State Bank of India.

Tarun: He has a slightly different opinion about the situation. His thought process is
as below:
o

He feels expecting RBI to cut the rates is wishful thinking. In fact he is of the opinion
that nobody can clearly predict what RBI is likely to do

o

He also identifies that the volatility in the markets is high, hence he believes that
option contracts are trading at very high premiums

o

He knows from his previous experience (via back testing) that the volatility is likely
to drop drastically just after RBI makes its announcement
To put his thoughts into action, he sells 5 lots of Nifty Call options and expects
to square off the position just around the announcement time.

Girish: He has a portfolio of 12 stocks which he has been holding for over 2 years.
Though he is a keen observer of the economy, he has no view on what RBI is likely
to do. He is also not worried about the outcome of the policy as he anyway plans to
hold on to his shares for a long period of time. Hence with this perspective he feels
the monetary policy is yet another short term passing tide in the market and will not
have a major impact on his portfolio. Even if it does, he has both the time and
patience to hold on to his shares.
However, Girish plans to buy more of his portfolio shares if the market overreacts to
the RBI news and his portfolio stocks falls steeply after the announcement is made.

8

Now, what RBI will eventually decide and who makes money is not our concern. The
point is to identify who is a speculator, a trader, and an investor based on their
thought process. All the three men seem to have logic based on which they have
taken a market action. Please note, Girish’s decision to do nothing itself is a market
action.
Sunil seems to be highly certain on what RBI is likely to do and therefore his market
actions are oriented towards a rate cut. In reality it is quite impossible to call a shot
on what RBI (or for that matter any regulator) will do. These are complex matters
and not straightforward to analyze. Betting on blind faith, without a rational
reasoning backing ones decision is speculation. Sunil seems to have done just that.
Tarun has arrived at what needs to be done based on a plan. If you are familiar with
options, he is simply setting up a trade to take advantage of the high options
premium. He is clearly not speculating on what RBI is likely to do as it does not
matter to him. His view is simple – volatility is high; hence the premiums are
attractive for an options seller. He is expecting the volatility to drop just prior to RBI
decision.
Is he speculating on the fact that the volatility will drop? Not really, because he
seems to have back tested his strategy for similar scenarios in the past. A trader
designs all his trades and not just speculates on an outcome.
Girish, the investor on the other hand seems to be least bit worked up on what RBI
is expected to do. He sees this as a short term market noise which may not have
any major impact on his portfolio. Even if it did have an impact, he is of the opinion
that his portfolio will eventually recover from it. Time is the only luxury markets
offer, and Girish is keen on leveraging this luxury to the maximum. In fact he is even
prepared to buy more of his portfolio stocks in case the market overreacts. His idea
is to hold on to his positions for a long period of time and not get swayed by short
term market movements.
All the three of them have different mindsets which leads them to react differently
to the same situation. The focus of this chapter is to understand why Girish, the
investor has a long term perspective and not really bothered about short term
movements in the market.

2.2 – The compounding effect
To appreciate why Girish decided to stay invested and not really react to short term
market movement, one has to understand how money compounds. Compounding
in simple terms is the ability of money to grow when the gains of year 1 is
reinvested for year 2.

9

For example consider you invest Rs.100 which is expected to grow at 20% year on
year (recall this is also called the CAGR). At the end of the first year the money is
expected to grow to Rs.120. At the end of year 1 you have two options:
1. Let Rs.20 in profits remain invested along with the original principal of Rs.100 or
2. Withdraw the profits of Rs.20.
You decide not withdraw Rs.20 profit; instead you decide to reinvest the money for
the 2nd year. At the end of 2nd year, Rs.120 grows to Rs.144. At the end of 3rd year
Rs.144 grows to Rs.173. So on and so forth.
Compare this with withdrawing Rs.20 profits every year. Had you opted to withdraw
Rs.20 every year then at the end of 3rd year the profits would have been just Rs. 60.
However since you decided to stay invested, the profits at the end of 3 years is
Rs.173. A good Rs.13 or 21.7% over Rs.60 is generated just because you opted to do
nothing and decided to stay invested. This is called the compounding effect. Let us
take this analysis a little further, have a look at the chart below:

The chart above shows how Rs.100 invested at 20% grows over a 10 year period. If
you notice, it took almost 6 years for the money to grow from Rs.100 to Rs.300.
However the next Rs.300 was generated in only 4 years i.e from the 6th to 10th
year.
This is in fact the most interesting property of the compounding effect. The longer
you stay invested, the harder (and faster) the money works for you. This is exactly
why Girish decided to stay invested – to exploit the luxury of time that the market
offers.
All investments made based on fundamental analysis require the investors to stay
committed for the long term. The investor has to develop this mindset while he
chooses to invest.

10

2.3 – Does investing work?
Think about a sapling – if you give it the right amount of water, manure, and care
would it not grow? Of course it will. Likewise, think about a good business with
healthy sales, great margins, innovative products, and an ethical management. Is it
not obvious that the share price of such companies would appreciate? In some
situations the price appreciation may delay (recall the Eicher Motors chart from
previous chapter), but it certainly will always appreciate. This has happened over
and over again across markets in the world, including India.
An investment in a good company defined by investable grade attributes will
always yield results. However, one has to develop the appetite to digest short term
market volatility.

2.4 – Investible grade attributes? What does that mean?
Like we discussed briefly in the previous chapter, an investible grade company has a
few distinguishable characteristics. These characteristics can be classified under two
heads namely the ‘Qualitative aspect’ and the ‘Quantitative aspects’. The process of
evaluating a fundamentally strong company includes a study of both these aspects.
In fact in my personal investment practice, I give the qualitative aspects a little more
importance over the quantitative aspects.
The Qualitative aspect mainly involves understanding the non numeric aspects of
the business. This includes many factors such as:
1. Management’s background – Who are they, their background, experience,
education, do they have the merit to run the business, any criminal cases against
the promoters etc
2. Business ethics – is the management involved in scams, bribery, unfair business
practices
3. Corporate governance – Appointment of directors, organization structure,
transparency etc
4. Minority shareholders – How does the management treat minority shareholders,
do they consider their interest while taking corporate actions
5. Share transactions – Is the management buying/selling shares of the company
through clandestine promoter groups
6. Related party transactions – Is the company tendering financial favors to known
entities such as promoter’s relatives, friends, vendors etc at the cost of the
shareholders funds?
7. Salaries paid to promoters – Is the management paying themselves a hefty salary,
usually a percentage of profits
8. Operator activity in stocks – Does the stock price display unusual price behavior
especially at a time when the promoter is transacting in the shares

11

9. Shareholders – Who are the significant shareholders in the firm, who are the
people with above 1% of the outstanding shares of the company
10. Political affiliation – Is the company or its promoters too close to a political party?
Does the business require constant political support?
11. Promoter lifestyle – Are the promoters too flamboyant and loud about their
lifestyle? Do they like to display their wealth?
A red flag is raised when any of the factors mentioned above do not fall in the right
place. For example, if a company undertakes too many related party transactions
then it would send a signal of favoritism and malpractice by the company. This is
not good in the long run. So even if the company has great profit margins,
malpractice is not acceptable. It would only be a matter of time before the market
discovers matters pertaining to ‘related party transactions’ and punishes the
company by bringing the stock price lower. Hence an investor would be better off
not investing in companies with great margins if such a company scores low on
corporate governance.
Qualitative aspects are not easy to uncover because these are very subtle matters.
However a diligent investor can easily figure this out by paying attention to annual
report, management interviews, news reports etc. As we proceed through this
module we will highlight various qualitative aspects.
The quantitative aspects are matters related to financial numbers. Some of the
quantitative aspects are straightforward while some of them are not. For example
cash held in inventory is straight forward however ‘inventory number of days’ is not.
This is a metric that needs to be calculated. The stock markets pay a lot of attention
to quantitative aspects. Quantitative aspects include many things, to name few:
1. Profitability and its growth
2. Margins and its growth
3. Earnings and its growth
4. Matters related to expenses
5. Operating efficiency
6. Pricing power
7. Matters related to taxes
8. Dividends payout
9. Cash flow from various activities
10. Debt – both short term and long term
11. Working capital management
12. Asset growth
13. Investments
14. Financial Ratios

12

The list is virtually endless. In fact, each sector has different metrics. For example:

For a retail Industry:

For an Oil and Gas Industry:

1. Total number of stores

1. Oil to Natural Gas revenue ratio

2. Average sales per store

2. Exploration costs

3. Total sales per square foot

3. Opening oil balance (inventory)

4. Merchandise margins

4. Developed reserves

5. Owned store to franchisee ratio

5. Total production growth

Over the next few chapters we will understand how to read the basic financial
statements, as published in the annual report. As you may know, the financial
statement is the source for all the number crunching as required in the analysis of
quantitative aspects.

Key takeaways from this chapter:
1. The mindset of a trader and an investor is different
2. The investor has to develop an investment mindset if he is serious about investing
3. The investor should stay invested for a long period of time for the returns to
compound
4. The speed at which the money doubles increases drastically the more time you stay
invested. This is one of the properties of compounding
5. Every investment has to be evaluated on two aspects – qualitative & quantitative
6. Qualitative aspects revolve around the non numeric information related to the
company
7. The quantitative aspects involve analyzing numeric data. The financial statements
are the important source of finding the quantitative data.

13

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 3

How to Read the Annual Report of a
Company
71

3.1 – What is an Annual Report?
The annual report (AR) is a yearly publication by the company and is sent to the
shareholders and other interested parties. The annual report is published by the
end of the Financial Year, and all the data made available in the annual report is
dated to 31st March. The AR is usually available on the company’s website (in the
investors section) as a PDF document or one can contact the company to get a hard
copy of the same.
Since the annual report is published by the company, whatever is mentioned in the
AR is assumed to be official. Hence, any misrepresentation of facts in the annual
report can be held against the company. To give you a perspective, AR contains the
auditor’s certificates (signed, dated, and sealed) certifying the sanctity of the
financial data included in the annual report.
Potential investors and the present shareholders are the primary audience for the
annual report. Annual reports should provide the most pertinent information to an
investor and should also communicate the company’s primary message. For an
investor, the annual report must be the default option to seek information about a
company. Of course there are many media websites claiming to give the financial

14

information about the company; however the investors should avoid seeking
information from such sources. Remember the information is more reliable if we
get it get it directly from the annual report.
Why would the media website misrepresent the company information you may ask?
Well, they may not do it deliberately but they may be forced to do it due to other
factors. For example the company may like to include ‘depreciation’ in the expense
side of P&L, but the media website may like to include it under a separate header.
While this would not impact the overall numbers, it does interrupt the overall
sequencing of data.

3.2 – What to look for in an Annual Report?
The annual report has many sections that contain useful information about the
company. One has to be careful while going through the annual report as there is a
very thin line between the facts presented by the company and the marketing
content that the company wants you to read.
Let us briefly go through the various sections of an annual report and understand
what the company is trying to communicate in the AR. For the sake of illustration, I
have taken the Annual Report of Amara Raja Batteries Limited, belonging to
Financial Year 2013-2014. As you may know Amara Raja Batteries Limited
manufactures automobile and industrial batteries. You can download ARBL’s FY2014
AR from here (http://www.amararaja.co.in/annual_reports.asp)
Please remember, the objective of this chapter is to give you a brief orientation on
how to read an annual report. Running through each and every page of an AR is not
practical; however, I would like to share some insights into how I would personally
read through an AR, and also help you understand what kind of information is
required and what information we can ignore.
For a better understanding, I would urge you to download the Annual Report of
ARBL and go through it simultaneously as we progress through this chapter.
ARBL’s annual report contains the following 9 sections:
o

Financial Highlights

o

The Management Statement

o

Management Discussion & Analysis

o

10 year Financial highlights

o

Corporate Information

o

Director’s Report

o

Report on Corporate governance

o

Financial Section, and

15

o

Notice
Note, no two annual reports are the same; they are all made to suite the company’s
requirement keeping in perspective the industry they operate in. However, some of
the sections in the annual report are common across annual reports.
The first section in ARBL’s AR is the Financial Highlights. Financial Highlights
contains the bird’s eye view on how the financials of the company looks for the year
gone by. . The information in this section can be in the form of a table or a graphical
display of data. This section of the annual report generally does a multi-year
comparison of the operating and business metrics.
Here is the snapshot of the same:

The details that you see in the Financial Highlights section are basically an extract
from the company’s financial statement. Along with the extracts, the company can
also include a few financial ratios, which are calculated by the company itself. I
briefly look through this section to get an overall idea, but I do not like to spend too
much time on it. The reason for looking at this section briefly is that, I would anyway
calculate these and many other ratios myself and while I do so, I would gain greater
clarity on the company and its numbers. Needless to say, over the next few chapters
we will understand how to read and understand the financial statements of the
company and also how to calculate the financial ratios.
The next two sections i.e the ‘Management Statement’ and ‘Management
Discussion & Analysis’ are quite important. I spend time going through these
sections. Both these sections gives you a sense on what the management of the
company has to say about their business and the industry in general. As an investor
or as a potential investor in the company, every word mentioned in these sections is

16

important. In fact some of the details related to the ‘Qualitative aspects’ (as
discussed in chapter 2), can be found in these two sections of the AR.
In the ‘Management Statement’ (sometimes called the Chairman’s Message), the
investor gets a perspective of how the man sitting right on top is thinking about his
business. The content here is usually broad based and gives a sense on how the
business is positioned. When I read through this section, I look at how realistic the
management is. I am very keen to see if the company’s management has its feet on
the ground. I also observe if they are transparent on discussing details on what
went right and what went wrong for the business.
One example that I explicitly remember was reading through the chairman’s
message of a well established tea manufacturing company. In his message, the
chairman was talking about a revenue growth of nearly 10%, however the historical
revenue numbers suggested that the company’s revenue was growing at a rate of 45%. Clearly in this context, the growth rate of 10% seemed like a celestial move. This
also indicated to me that the man on top may not really be in sync with ground
reality and hence I decided not to invest in the company. Retrospectively when I
look back at my decision not to invest, it was probably the right decision.
Here is the snapshot of Amara Raja Batteries Limited; I have highlighted a small part
that I think is interesting. I would encourage you to read through the entire message
in the Annual Report.

17

Moving ahead, the next section is the ‘Management Discussion & Analysis’ or
‘MD&A’. This according to me is perhaps one of the most important sections in the
whole of AR. The most standard way for any company to start this section is by
talking about the macro trends in the economy. They discuss the overall economic
activity of the country and the business sentiment across the corporate world. If the
company has high exposure to exports, they even talk about global economic and
business sentiment.
ARBL has both exports and domestic business interest; hence they discuss both
these angles in their AR. See the snapshot below:

18

ARBL’s view on the Indian economy:

19

Following this the companies usually talk about the trends in the industry and what
they expect for the year ahead. This is an important section as we can understand
what the company perceives as threats and opportunities in the industry. Most
importantly I read through this, and also compare it with its peers to understand if
the company has any advantage over its peers.
For example, if Amara Raja Batteries limited is a company of interest to me, I would
read through this part of the AR and also would read through what Exide Batteries
Limited has to say in their AR.
Remember until this point the discussion in the Management Discussion & Analysis
is broad based and generic (global economy, domestic economy, and industry
trends). However going forward, the company would discuss various aspects related
to its business. It talks about how the business had performed across various
divisions, how did it fare in comparison to the previous year etc. The company in
fact gives out specific numbers in this section.
Here is a snapshot of the same:

20

Some companies even discuss their guidelines and strategies for the year ahead
across the various verticals they operate in. Do have a look at the snapshot below:

After discussing these in ‘Management Discussion & Analysis’ the annual report
includes a series of other reports such as – Human Resources report, R&D report,
Technology report etc. Each of these reports are important in the context of the

21

industry the company operates in. For example, if I am reading through a
manufacturing company annual report, I would be particularly interested in the
human resources report to understand if the company has any labor issues. If there
are serious signs of labor issues then it could potentially lead to the factory being
shut down, which is not good for the company’s shareholders.

3.3 – The Financial Statements
Finally, the last section of the AR contains the financial statements of the company.
As you would agree, the financial statements are perhaps one of the most
important aspects of an Annual Report. There are three financial statements that
the company will present namely:
1. The Profit and Loss statement
2. The Balance Sheet and
3. The Cash flow statement
We will understand each of these statements in detail over the next few chapters.
However at this stage it is important to understand that the financial statements
come in two forms.
1. Standalone financial statement or simply standalone numbers and
2. Consolidated financial statement or simply consolidated numbers
To understand the difference between standalone and consolidated numbers, we
need to understand the structure of a company.
Typically, a well established company has many subsidiaries. These companies also
act as a holding company for several other well established companies. To help you
understand this better, I have taken the example of CRISIL Limited’s shareholding
structure. You can find the same in CRISIL’s annual report. As you may know, CRISIL
is an Indian company with a major focus on corporate credit rating services.

22

As you can see in the above share holding structure:
1. Standard & Poor’s (S&P), a US based rating agency holds a 51% stake in CRISIL.
Hence S&P is the ‘Holding company’ or the ‘Promoter’ of CRISIL
2. The balance 49% of shares of CRISIL is held by Public and other Financial institutions
3. However, S&P itself is 100% subsidiary of another company called ‘The McGraw-Hill
Companies’
1. This means McGraw Hill fully owns S&P, and S&P owns 51% of CRISIL

4. Further, CRISIL itself fully owns (100% shareholding) another company called
‘Irevna’.
Keeping the above in perspective, think about this hypothetical situation. Assume,
for the financial year 2014, CRISIL makes a loss of Rs.1000 Crs and Irevna, its 100%
subsidiary makes a profit of Rs.700 Crs. What do you would be the overall
profitability of CRISIL?
Well, this is quite simple – CRISIL on its own made a loss of Rs.1000 Crs, but its
subsidiary Irevna made a profit of Rs.700 Crs, hence the overall P&L of CRISIL is
(Rs.1000 Crs) + Rs.700 Crs = (Rs.300 Crs).
Thanks to its subsidiary, CRISIL’s loss is reduced to Rs.300 Crs as opposed to a
massive loss of Rs.1000 Crs. Another way to look at it is, CRISIL on
a standalone basis made a loss of Rs.1000 Crs, but on a consolidated basis made a
loss of Rs.300 Crs.

23

Hence, Standalone Financial statements represent the standalone numbers/
financials of the company itself and do not include the financials of its subsidiaries.
However the consolidated numbers includes the companies (i.e.standalone
financials) and its subsidiaries financial statements.
I personally prefer to look through the consolidated financial statements as it gives
a better representation of the company’s financial position.

3.4 – Schedules of Financial Statements
When the company reports its financial statements, they usually report the full
statement in the beginning and then follow it up with a detailed explanation.
Have a look at the snapshot of one of ARBL’s financial statement (balance sheet):

Each particular in the financial statement is referred to as the line item. For example
the first line item in the Balance Sheet (under Equity and Liability) is the share
capital (as pointed out by the green arrow). If you notice, there is a note number
associated with share capital. These are called the ‘Schedules’ related to the
financial statement. Looking into the above statement, ARBL states that the share
capital stands at Rs.17.081 Crs (or Rs.170.81 Million). As an investor I obviously
would be interested to know how ARBL arrived at Rs.17.081 Crs as their share
capital. To figure this out, one needs to look into the associated schedule (note
number 2). Please look at the snapshot below:

24

Of course, considering you may be new to financial statements, jargon’s like share
capital make not make much sense. However the financial statements are extremely
simple to understand, and over the next few chapters you will understand how to
read the financial statements and make sense of it. But for now do remember that
the main financial statement gives you the summary and the associated schedules
give the details pertaining to each line item.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. The Annual Report (AR) of a company is an official communication from the
company to its investors and other stakeholders
2. The AR is the best source to get information about the company; hence AR should
be the default choice for the investor to source company related information
3. The AR contains many sections, with each section highlighting certain aspect of the
business
4. The AR is also the best source to get information related to the qualitative aspects of
the company
5. The management discussion and analysis is one of the most important sections in
the AR. It has the management’s perspective on the overall economy of the country,
their outlook on the industry they operate in for the year gone by (what went right
and what went wrong), and what they foresee for the year ahead
6. The AR contains three financial statements – Profit & Loss statement, Balance Sheet,
and Cash Flow statement
7. The standalone statement contains the financial numbers of only the company in
consideration. However the consolidated numbers contains the company and its
subsidiaries financial numbers.

25

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 4

Understanding the P&L Statement (Part
1)
53

4.1 – Overview of the financial statements
You can think about the financial statements from two different angles:
1. From the maker’s perspective
2. From the user’s perspective
A maker prepares the financial statements. He is typically a person with an
accounting background. His job involves preparing ledger entries, matching bills and
receipts, tallying the inflows versus the outflows, auditing etc. The final objective of
the is to prepare transparent financial statements which best represents the true
financial position of the company. To prepare such a financial statement certain
skills are required, usually these skills are developed through the rigor of a
Chartered Accountant’s training program.
The user on the other hand just needs to be in a position to understand what the
maker has prepared. He is just the user of the financial statements. He need not
really know the details of the journal entries or the audit procedure. His main
concern is to read what is being stated and use it to make his decisions.
To put this in context, think about Google. Most of us do not understand Google’s
complex search engine algorithm that runs in the backend, however we all know
how to use Google effectively. Such is the distinction between the maker and the
user of financial statements.
A common misconception amongst the market participants is that, they believe the
fundamental analyst needs to be thorough with concepts of financial statement
preparation. While knowing this certainly helps, it is not really required. To be a
fundamental analyst, one just needs to be the user and not the maker of the
financial statements.
There are three main financial statements that a company showcases to represent
its performance.
1. The Profit and Loss statement
2. The Balance Sheet
3. The Cash flow statement

26

Over the next few chapters we will understand each of these statements from the
user’s perspective.

4.2 – The Profit and Loss statement
The Profit and Loss statement is also popularly referred to as the P&L statement,
Income Statement, Statement of Operations, and Statement of Earnings. The Profit
and Loss statement shows what has transpired during a time period. The P&L
statement reports information on:
1. The revenue of the company for the given period (yearly or quarterly)
2. The expenses incurred to generate the revenues
3. Tax and depreciation
4. The earnings per share number
From my experience, the financial statements are best understood by looking at the
actual statement and figuring out the information. Hence, here is the P&L statement
of Amara Raja Batteries Limited (ARBL). Let us understand each and every line item.

27

4.3 – The Top Line of the company (Revenue)
You may have heard analysts talk about the top line of a company. When they do
so, they are referring to the revenue side of the P&L statement. The revenue side is
the first set of numbers the company presents in the P&L.

Before we start understanding the revenue side, let us notice a few things
mentioned on the header of the P&L statement:

The header clearly states:
1. The statement of P&L for the year ending March 31, 2014, hence this is an annual
statement and not a quarterly statement. Also, since it is as of March 31st 2014 it is
evident that the statement is for the Financial Year 2013 – 2014 or simply it can be
referred to as the FY14 numbers
2. All currency is denominated in Rupee Million. Note – 1 Million Rupees is equal to
Ten Lakh Rupees. It is upto the company’s discretion to decide which unit they
would prefer to express their numbers in
3. The particulars show all the main headings of the statement. Any associated note to
the particulars is present in the note section (also called the schedule). An
associated number is assigned to the note (Note Number)
4. By default when companies report the numbers in the financial statement they
present the current year number on the left most column and the previous year
number to the right. In this case the numbers are for FY14 (latest) and FY13
(previous)
The first line item on the revenue side is called the Sale of Products.

28

Since we know we are dealing with a batteries company, clearly sale of products
means the Rupee value of all the battery sales the company has sold during FY14.
The sales stand at Rs.38,041,270,000/- or about Rs.3,804 Crore. The company sold
batteries worth Rs.3,294 Cr in the previous financial year i.e FY13.
Please note, I will restate all the numbers in Rupee Crore as I believe this is more
intuitive to understand.
The next line item is the excise duty. This is the amount (Rs.400 Crs) the company
would pay to the government; hence the revenue has to be adjusted.
The revenue adjusted after the excise duty is the net sales of the company. The
net sales of ARBL is Rs.3403 Crs for FY14. The same was Rs.2943 Crs for FY13.
Apart from the sale of products, the company also draws revenue from services.
This could probably be in the form of annual battery maintenance. The revenue
from sale of services stands at Rs.30.9Crs for FY14.
The company also includes “other operating revenues” at Rs.2.1crs.This could be
revenues through the sale of products or services that is incidental to the core
operations of the company.
Finally the revenue from Sale of products + Sale of services + Other operating
revenues sums up to give the total operating revenue of the company. This is
reported at Rs.3436 Crs for FY14 and Rs.2959Crs for FY13. Interesting, there is a
note; numbered 17 associated with “Net Revenue from Operations” which will help
us inspect this aspect further.
Do recall, in the previous chapter we had discussed about notes and schedules of
the financial statement.
The following snapshot gives the details of note 17.

29

Clearly, the notes give a more detailed analysis of the split up of revenues from
operations (does not include other income details). As you can see under the
particulars, section ‘a’ talks about the split up under sales of products.
1. Sale of storage batteries in the form of finished goods for the year FY14 is Rs.3523
Crs versus Rs.3036 Crs in FY13
2. Sale of Storage batteries (stock in trade) is Rs.208 Crs in FY14 versus 149 Crs. Stock
in trade refers to finished goods of previous financial year being sold in this financial
year
3. Sale of home UPS (stock in goods) is at Rs.71 Crs in FY14 versus Rs.109 Crs FY13
4. Net sales from sales of products adjusted for excise duty amounts to Rs.3403 Crs,
which matches with the number reported in the P&L statement
5. Likewise you can notice the split up for revenue from services. The revenue number
of Rs.30.9 tallies with number reported in the P&L statement
6. In the note, the company says the “Sale of Process Scrap” generated revenue of
Rs.2.1 Cr. Note that the sale of process scrap is incidental to the operations of the
company, hence reported as ‘Other operating revenue”.
7. Adding up all the revenue streams of the company i.e Rs.3403 Crs+ Rs.30.9 Crs
+Rs.2.1 Crs gets us the Net revenue from operations = Rs.3436 Crs.
8. You can also find similar split up for FY13
If you notice the P&L statement, apart from net revenue from operations ARBL also
reports ‘Other Income’ of Rs.45.5 Crs. Note number 18 reproduced below explains
what the other income is all about.

30

As we can see the other income includes income that is not related to the main
business of the company. It includes interest on bank deposits, dividends, insurance
claims, royalty income etc. Usually the other income forms (and it should) a small
portion of the total income. A large ‘other income’ usually draws a red flag and it
would demand a further investigation.
So adding up revenue from operations (Rs.3436 Crs) and other income (Rs.45 Crs),
we have the total revenue of for FY14 at Rs.3482Crs.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. The financial statement provides information and conveys the financial position of
the company
2. A complete set of financial statements include the Profit & Loss Account, Balance
Sheet and Cash Flow Statement
3. A fundamental Analyst is a user of financial statement, and he just needs to know
what the maker of the financial statements states
4. The profit and loss statement gives the profitability of the company for the year
under consideration
5. The P&L statement is an estimate, as the company can revise the numbers at a later
point. Also by default companies publish data for the current year and the previous
year, side by side
6. The revenue side of the P&L is also called the top line of the company
7. Revenue from operations is the main source of revenue for the company
8. Other operating income includes revenue incidental to the business

31

9. The other income includes revenue from non operating sources
10. The sum of revenue from operations (net of duty), other operating income, and
other incomes gives the ‘Net Revenue from Operations’

32

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 5

Understanding P&L Statement (Part 2)
121

5.1 – The Expense details
In the previous chapter we had learnt about the revenues a company generates.
Moving further on the P&L statement, in this chapter we will look at the expense
side of the Profit and Loss Statement along with the associated notes. Expenses are
generally classified according to their function, which is also called the cost of sales
method or based on the nature of expense. An analysis of the expenses must be
shown in the Profit and Loss statement or in the notes. As you can see in the extract
below almost all the line items have a note associated to it.

The first line item on the expense side is ‘Cost of materials consumed’; this is
invariably the cost of raw material that the company requires to manufacture

33

finished goods. As you can see the cost of raw material consumed/raw material is
the largest expense incurred by the company. This expense stands at Rs.2101 Crs
for the FY14 and Rs.1760 Crs for the FY13. Note number 19 gives the associated
details for this expense, let us inspect the same.

As you can see note 19 gives us the details of the material consumed. The company
uses lead, lead alloys, separators and other items all of which adds up to Rs.2101
Crs.
The next two line items talks about ‘Purchases of Stock in Trade’ and ‘Change in
Inventories of finished goods , work–in-process & stock–in-trade’. Both these line
items are associated with the same note (Note 20).
Purchases of stock in trade, refers to all the purchases of finished goods that the
company buys towards conducting its business. This stands at Rs.211 Crs. I will give
you more clarity on this line item shortly.
Change in inventory of finished goods refers to the costs of manufacturing incurred
by the company in the past , but the goods manufactured in the past were sold in
the present/current financial year. This stands at (Rs.29.2) Crs for the FY14.
A negative number indicates that the company produced more batteries in the FY14
than it managed to sell. To give a sense of proportion (in terms of sales and costs of
sales) the company deducts the cost incurred in manufacturing the extra goods
from the current year costs. The company will add this cost when they manage to
sell these extra products sometime in future. This cost, which the company adds
back later, will be included in the “Purchases of Stock in Trade” line item.
Here is an extract of Note 20 which details the above two line items:

34

The details mentioned on the above extract are quite straightforward and is easy to
understand. At this stage it may not be necessary to dig deeper into this note. It is
good to know where the grand total lies. However, when we take up ‘Financial
Modeling’ as a separate module we will delve deeper into this aspect.
The next line item on the expense side is “Employee Benefit Expense”. This is quite
intuitive as it includes expense incurred in terms of the salaries paid, contribution
towards provident funds, and other employee welfare expenses. This stands at
Rs.158 Crs for the FY14. Have a look at the extract of note 21 which details the
‘Employee Benefit Expense’.

Here is something for you to think about – A company generating Rs.3482 Crs is
spending only Rs.158 Crs or just 4.5% of its sales on its employees. In fact this is the
pattern across most of companies (at least non IT). Perhaps it is time for you to
rethink about that entrepreneurial dream you may have nurtured.
The next line item is the “Finance Cost / Finance Charges/ Borrowing Costs”. Finance
cost is interest costs and other costs that an entity pays when it borrows funds. The

35

interest is paid to the lenders of the company. The lenders could be banks or private
lenders. The company’s finance cost stands at Rs.0.7 Crs for the FY14. We will
discuss more about the debt and related matters when we take up the chapter on
the balance sheet later.
Following the finance cost the next line item is “Depreciation and Amortization”
costs which stand at Rs.64.5 Crs. To understand depreciation and amortization we
need to understand the concept of tangible and intangible assets.
A tangible asset is one which has a physical form and provides an economic value to
the company. For example a laptop, a printer, a car, plants, machinery, buildings etc.
An intangible asset is something that does not have a physical form but still
provides an economic value to the company such as brand value, trademarks,
copyrights, patents, franchises, customer lists etc.
An asset (tangible or intangible) has to be depreciated over its useful life. Useful life
is defined as the period during which the asset can provide economic benefit to the
company. For example the useful life of a laptop could be 4 years. Let us
understand depreciation better with the help of the following example.
Zerodha, a stock broking firm generates Rs.100,000/- from the stock broking
business. However Zerodha incurred an expense of Rs.65,000/- towards the
purchase of a high performance computer server. The economic life (useful life) of
the server is expected to be 5 years. Now if you were to look into the earning
capability of Zerodha it appears that on one hand Zerodha earned Rs.100,000/- and
on the other hand spent Rs.65,000/- and therefore retained just Rs.35,000/-. This
skews the earnings data for the current year and does not really reflect the true
earning capability of the company.
Remember the asset even though purchased this year, would continue to provide
economic benefits over its useful life. Hence it makes sense to spread the cost of
acquiring the asset over its useful life. This is called depreciation. This means
instead of showing an upfront lump sum expense (towards purchase of an asset),
the company can show a smaller amount spread across the useful life of an asset.
Thus Rs.65,000/- will be spread across the useful life of the server, which is 5. Hence
65,000/ 5 = Rs.13,000/- would be depreciated every year over the next five years. By
depreciating the asset, we are spreading the upfront cost. Hence after the
depreciation computation, Zerodha would now show its earrings as Rs.100,000 –
Rs.13,000 = Rs.87,000/-.
We can do a similar exercise for non tangible assets. The depreciation equivalent for
non tangible assets is called amortization.
Now here is an important idea – Zerodha depreciates the cost of acquiring an asset
over its useful life. However, in reality there is an actual outflow of Rs.65,000/- paid

36

towards the asset purchase. But now, it seems like the P&L is not capturing this
outflow. As an analyst, how do we get a sense of the cash movement? Well, the cash
movement is captured in the cash flow statement, which we will understand in the
later chapters.
Here is the snapshot of Note 23, detailing the depreciation cost.

The last line item on the expense side is “other expenses” at Rs.434.6 Crs. This is a
huge amount classified under ‘other expenses’, hence it deserves a detailed
inspection.

37

From the note it is quite clear that other expenses include manufacturing, selling,
administrative and other expenses. The details are mentioned in the note. For
example, Amara Raja Batteries Limited (ARBL) spent Rs.27.5 Crs on advertisement
and promotional activities.
Adding up all the expenses mentioned in the expense side of P&L, it seems that
Amara Raja Batteries has spent Rs.2941.6 Crs.

5.2 – The Profit before tax
It refers to the net operating income after deducting operating expenses but before
deducting taxes and interest. Proceeding further on the P&L statement we can see
that ARBL has mentioned their profit before tax and exceptional item numbers.
Simply put the profit before tax (PBT) is:
Profit before Tax = Total Revenues – Total Operating Expenses
= Rs.3482 – Rs.2941.6
=Rs.540.5
However there seems to be an exceptional item/ extraordinary item of Rs.3.8 Crs,
which needs to be deducted. Exceptional items/ extraordinary items are expenses

38

occurring at one odd time for the company and the company does not foresee this
as a recurring expense. Hence they treat it separately on the P&L statement.
Hence profit before tax and extraordinary items will be:
= 540.5 – 3.88
= Rs.536.6 Crs
The snapshot below (extract from P&L) shows the PBT(Profit Before Tax) of ARBL:

5.3 – Net Profit after tax
The net operating profit after tax is defined as the company’s operating profit after
deducting its tax liability. We are now looking into the last part of the P&L
statement, which is the profit after tax. This is also called the bottom line of the P&L
statement.

As you can see from the snapshot above, to arrive at the profit after tax (PAT) we
need to deduct all the applicable tax expenses from the PBT. Current tax is the
corporate tax applicable for the given year. This stands at Rs.158 Crs. Besides this,
there are other taxes that the company has paid. All taxes together total upto
Rs.169.21 Crs. Deducting the tax amount from the PBT of Rs.536.6 gives us the
profit after tax (PAT) at Rs.367.4 Crs.
Hence Net PAT = PBT – Applicable taxes.
The last line in the P&L statement talks about basic and diluted earnings per share.
The EPS is one of the most frequently used statistics in financial analysis. EPS also
serves as a means to assess the stewardship and management role performed by
the company directors and managers. The earnings per share (EPS) is a very sacred
number which indicates how much the company is earning per face value of the
ordinary share. It appears that ARBL is earning Rs.21.51 per share. The detailed
calculation is as shown below:

39

The company indicates that there are 17,08,12,500 shares outstanding in the
market. Dividing the total profit after tax number by the outstanding number of
shares, we can arrive at the earnings per share number. In this case:
Rs.367.4 Crs divided by 17,08,12,500 yields Rs.21.5 per share.

5.4 – Conclusion
Now that we have gone through all the line items in the P&L statement let us relook
at it in its entirety.

40

Hopefully, the statement above should look more meaningful to you by now.
Remember almost all line items in the P&L statement will have an associated note.
You can always look into the notes to seek greater clarity. Also at this stage we have
just understood how to read the P&L statement, but we still need to analyze what
the numbers mean. We will do this when we take up the financial ratios. Also, the
P&L statement is very closely connected with the other two financial statements i.e
the balance sheet and the cash flow statement. We will explore these connections at
a later stage.

Key takeaways from this chapter:
1. The expense part of the P&L statement contains information on all the expenses
incurred by the company during the financial year
2. Each expense can be studied with reference to a note which you can explore for
further information

41

3. Depreciation and amortization is way of spreading the cost of an asset over its
useful life
4. Finance cost is the cost of interest and other charges paid when the company
borrows money for its capital expenditure.
5. PBT = Total Revenue – Total Expense – Exceptional items (if any)
6. Net PAT = PBT – applicable taxes
7. EPS reflects the earning capacity of a company on a per share basis. Earnings are
profit after tax and preferred dividends.
8. EPS = PAT / Total number of outstanding ordinary shares

42

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 6

Understanding Balance Sheet Statement
(Part 1)
132

6.1 – The balance sheet equation
While the P&L statement gives us information pertaining to the profitability of the
company, the balance sheet gives us information pertaining to the assets, liabilities,
and the shareholders equity. The P&L statement as you understood, discusses
about the profitability for the financial year under consideration, hence it is good to
say that the P&L statement is a standalone statement. The balance sheet however is
prepared on a flow basis, meaning, it has financial information pertaining to the
company right from the time it was incorporated. Thus while the P&L talks about
how the company performed in a particular financial year; the balance sheet on the
other hand discusses how the company has evolved financially over the years.
Have a look at the balance sheet of Amara Raja Batteries Limited (ARBL):

43

As you can see the balance sheet contains details about the assets, liabilities, and
equity.
We had discussed about assets in the previous chapter. Assets, both tangible and
intangible are owned by the company. An asset is a resource controlled by the
company, and is expected to have an economic value in the future. Typical
examples of assets include plants, machinery, cash, brands, patents etc. Assets are
of two types, current and non-current, we will discuss these later in the chapter.
Liability on the other hand represents the company’s obligation. The obligation is
taken up by the company because the company believes these obligations will
provide economic value in the long run. Liability in simple words is the loan that the
company has taken and it is therefore obligated to repay back. Typical examples of
obligation include short term borrowing, long term borrowing, payments due etc.
Liabilities are of two types namely current and non-current. We will discuss about
the kinds of liabilities later on in the chapter.
In any typical balance sheet, the total assets of company should be equal to the
total liabilities of the company. Hence,

44

Assets = Liabilities
The equation above is called the balance sheet equation or the accounting
equation. In fact this equation depicts the key property of the balance sheet i.e the
balance sheet should always be balanced. In other word the Assets of the company
should be equal to the Liabilities of the company. This is because everything that a
company owns (Assets) has to be purchased either from either the owner’s capital
or liabilities.
Owners Capital is the difference between the Assets and Liabilities. It is also called
the ‘Shareholders Equity’ or the ‘Net worth’. Representing this in the form of an
equation :
Share holders equity = Assets – Liabilities

6.2 –A quick note on shareholders’ funds
As we know the balance sheet has two main sections i.e. the assets and the
liabilities. The liabilities as you know represent the obligation of the company. The
shareholders’ fund, which is integral to the liabilities side of the balance sheet, is
highlighted in the snapshot below. Many people find this term a little confusing.

If you think about it, on one hand we are discussing about liabilities which represent
the obligation of the company, and on the other hand we are discussing the
shareholders’ fund which represents the shareholders’ wealth. This is quite counter
intuitive isn’t it? How can liabilities and shareholders’ funds appear on the ‘Liabilities’
side of balance sheet? After all the shareholders funds represents the funds
belonging to its shareholders’ which in the true sense is an asset and not really a
liability.

45

To make sense of this, you should change the perceptive in which you look at a
company’s financial statement. Think about the entire company as an individual,
whose sole job is run its core operation and to create wealth to its shareholders’. By
thinking this way, you are in fact separating out the shareholders’ (which also
includes its promoters) and the company. With this new perspective, now think
about the financial statement. You will appreciate that, the financial statements is a
statement published by the company (which is an entity on its own) to communicate
to the world about its financial well being.
This also means the shareholders’ funds do not belong to the company as it
rightfully belongs to the company’s shareholders’. Hence from the company’s
perspective the shareholders’ funds are an obligation payable to shareholders’.
Hence this is shown on the liabilities side of the balance sheet.

6.3 –The liability side of balance sheet
The liabilities side of the balance sheet details out all the liabilities of the company.
Within liabilities there are three sub sections – shareholders’ fund, non-current
liabilities, and current liabilities. The first section is the shareholders’ funds.

To understand share capital, think about a fictional company issuing shares for the
first time. Imagine, Company ABC issues 1000 shares, with each share having a face
value of Rs.10 each. The share capital in this case would be Rs.10 x 1000 =
Rs.10,000/- (Face value X number of shares).
In the case of ARBL, the share capital is Rs.17.081 Crs (as published in the Balance
Sheet) and the Face Value is Rs.1/-. I got the FV value from the NSE’s website:

46

I can use the FV and share capital value to calculate the number of shares
outstanding. We know:
Share Capital = FV * Number of shares
Therefore,
Number of shares = Share Capital / FV
Hence in case of ARBL,
Number of shares = 17,08,10,000 / 1
= 17,08,10,000 shares
The next line item on the liability side of the Balance Sheet is the ‘Reserves and
Surplus’. Reserves are usually money earmarked by the company for specific
purposes. Surplus is where all the profits of the company reside. The reserves and
surplus for ARBL stands at Rs.1,345.6 Crs. The reserves and surplus have an
associated note, numbered 3. Let us look into the same.

47

As you can notice from the note, the company has earmarked funds across three
kinds of reserves:
1. Capital reserves – Usually earmarked for long term projects. Clearly ARBL does not
have much amount here. This amount belongs to the shareholders, but cannot be
distributed to them.
2. Securities premium reserve / account – This is where the premium over and
above the face/par value of the shares sits. ARBL has a Rs.31.18 Crs under this
reserve
3. General reserve – This is where all the accumulated profits of the company which is
not yet distributed to the shareholder reside. The company can use the money here
as a buffer. As you can see ARBL has Rs.218.4 Crs in general reserves.
The next section deals with the surplus. As mentioned earlier, surplus holds the
profits made during the year. Couple of interesting things to note:
1. As per the last year (FY13) balance sheet the surplus was Rs.829.8Crs. This is what is stated as
the opening line under surplus. See the image below:

48

1. The current year (FY14) profit of Rs.367.4 Crs is added to previous years closing
balance of surplus. Few things to take note here:
1. Notice how the bottom line of P&L is interacting with the balance sheet. This highlights a very
important fact – all the three financial statements are closely related
2. Notice how the previous year balance sheet number is added up to this year’s number. This
highlights the fact that the balance sheet is prepared on a flow basis, adding the carrying
forward numbers year on year

2. Previous year’s balance plus this year’s profit adds up to Rs.1197.2 Crs. The
company can choose to apportion this money for various purposes.
1. The first thing a company does is it transfers some money from the surplus to general reserves
so that it will come handy for future use. They have transferred close to Rs.36.7 Crs for this
purpose
2. After transferring to general reserves they have distributed Rs.55.1 Crs as dividends over which
they have to pay Rs.9.3 Crs as dividend distribution taxes.

3. After making the necessary apportions the company has Rs.1095.9 Crs as surplus as
closing balance. This as you may have guessed will be the opening balance for next
year’s (FY15) surplus account.
4. Total Reserves and Surplus = Capital reserve + securities premium reserve + general
reserves + surplus for the year. This stands at Rs.1345.6 Crs for the FY 14 against
Rs.1042.7 Crs for the FY13
The total shareholders’ fund is a sum of share capital and reserves & surplus. Since
this amount on the liability side of the balance sheet represents the money
belonging to shareholders’, this is called the ‘shareholders funds’.

6.4 – Non Current Liabilities
Non-current liabilities represent the long term obligations, which the company
intends to settle/ pay off not within 365 days/ 12 months of the balance sheet date.
These obligations stay on the books for few years. Non-current liabilities are
generally settled after 12 months after the reporting period.
Here is the snapshot of the non-current liabilities of Amara Raja batteries Ltd.

The company has three types of non-current liabilities; let us inspect each one of
them.
The long term borrowing (associated with note 4) is the first line item within the
non-current liabilities. Long term borrowing is one of the most important line item
in the entire balance sheet as it represents the amount of money that the company
has borrowed through various sources. Long term borrowing is also one of the key

49

inputs while calculating some of the financial ratios. Subsequently in this module we
will look into the financial ratios.
Let us look into the note associated with ‘Long term borrowings’:

From the note it is quite clear that the ‘Long term borrowings’ is in the form of
‘interest free sales tax deferment’. To understand what interest free sales tax
deferment really means, the company has explained just below the note (I have
highlighted the same in a red box). It appears to be some sort of tax incentive from
the state government. The company plans to settle this amount over a period of 14
years.
You will find that there are many companies which do not have long term
borrowings (debt). While it is a good to know that the company has no debt, you
must also question as to why there is no debt? Is it because the banks are refusing
to lend to the company? or is it because the company is not taking initiatives to
expand their business operations. Of course, we will deal with the analysis part of
the balance sheet later in the module.
Do recollect, we looked at ‘Finance Cost’ as a line item when we looked at the P&L
statement. If the debt of the company is high, then the finance cost will also be high.
The next line item within the non-current liability is ‘Deferred Tax Liability’. The
deferred tax liability is basically a provision for future tax payments. The company
foresees a situation where it may have to pay additional taxes in the future; hence
they set aside some funds for this purpose. Why do you think the company would
put itself in a situation where it has to pay more taxes for the current year at some
point in the future?
Well this happens because of the difference in the way depreciation is treated as
per Company’s act and Income tax. We will not get into this aspect as we will digress
from our objective of becoming users of financial statements. But do remember,
deferred tax liability arises due to the treatment of depreciation.

50

The last line item within the non-current liability is the ‘Long term provisions’. Long
term provisions are usually money set aside for employee benefits such as gratuity;
leave encashment, provident funds etc.

6.5 – Current liabilities
Current liabilities are a company’s obligations which are expected to be settled
within 365 days (less than 1 year). The term ‘Current’ is used to indicate that the
obligation is going to be settled soon, within a year. Going by that ‘non-current’
clearly means obligations that extend beyond 365 days.
Think about this way – if you buy a mobile phone on EMI (via a credit card) you
obviously plan to repay your credit card company within a few months. This
becomes your ‘current liability’. However if you buy an apartment by seeking a 15
year home loan from a housing finance company, it becomes your ‘non-current
liability’.
Here is the snapshot of ARBL’s current liabilities:

As you can see there are 4 line items within the current liabilities. The first one is the
short term borrowings. As the name suggests, these are short term obligations of
the company usually undertaken by the company to meet day to day cash
requirements (also called working capital requirements). Here is the extract of note
7, which details what short term borrowings mean:

Clearly as you can see, these are short term loans availed from the State bank of
India and Andhra Bank towards meeting the working capital requirements. It is
interesting to note that the short term borrowing is also kept at low level, at just
Rs.8.3Crs.

51

The next line item is Trade Payable (also called account payable) which is at Rs.127.7
Crs. These are obligations payable to vendors who supply to the company. The
vendors could be raw material suppliers, utility companies providing services,
stationary companies etc. Have a look at note 8 which gives the details:

The next line item just says ‘Other current liabilities’ which stands at Rs.215.6 Crs.
Usually ‘Other current Liabilities’ are obligations associated with the statutory
requirements and obligations that are not directly related to the operations of the
company. Here is note 9 associated with ‘Other current liabilities’:

The last line item in current liabilities is the ‘Short term provisions’ which stands at
Rs.281.8 Crs. Short term provisions is quite similar to long term provisions, both of
which deals with setting aside funds for employee benefits such as gratuity, leave
encashment, provident funds etc. Interestingly the note associated with ‘Short term
Provisions’ and the ‘Long term provisions’ is the same. Have a look at the following:

52

Since note 6 is detailing both long and short term provisions it runs into several
pages, hence for this reason I will not represent an extract of it. For those who are
curious to look into the same can refer to pages 80, 81, 82 and 83 in the FY14
Annual report for Amara Raja Batteries Limited.
However, from the user of a financial statement perspective all you need to know is
that these line items (short and long term provisions) deal with the employee and
related benefits. Please note, one should always look at the associated note to run
through the details.
We have now looked through half of the balance sheet which is broadly classified as
the Liabilities side of the Balance sheet. Let us relook at the balance sheet once
again to get a perspective:

53

Clearly,
Total Liability = Shareholders’ Funds + Non Current Liabilities + Current
Liabilities
= 1362.7 + 143.03 + 633.7
Total Liability = Rs.2139.4 Crs

54

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. A Balance sheet also called the Statement of Financial Position is prepared on a flow
basis which depicts the financial position of the company at any given point in time.
It is a statement which shows what the company owns ( assets) and what the
company owes (liabilities)
2. A business will generally need a balance sheet when it seeks investors, applies for
loans, submits taxes etc.
3. Balance sheet equation is Assets = Liabilities + Shareholders’ Equity
4. Liabilities are obligations or debts of a business from past transactions and Share
capital is number of shares * face value
5. Reserves are the funds earmarked for a specific purpose, which the company
intends to use in future
6. Surplus is where the profits of the company reside. This is one of the points where
the balance sheet and the P&L interact. Dividends are paid out of the surplus
7. Shareholders’ equity = Share capital + Reserves + Surplus. Equity is the claim of the
owners on the assets of the company. It represents the assets that remain after
deducting the liabilities. If you rearrange the Balance Sheet equation, Equity =
Assets – Liabilities.
8. Non-current liabilities or the long term liabilities are obligations which are expected
to be settled in not less than 365 days or 12 months of the balance sheet date
9. Deferred tax liabilities arise due to the discrepancy in the way the depreciation is
treated. Deferred tax liabilities are amounts of income taxes payable in the future
with respect to taxable differences as per accounting books and tax books.
10. Current liabilities are the obligations the company plans to settle within 365 days
/12 months of the balance sheet date.
11. In most cases both long and short term provisions are liabilities dealing with
employee related matters
12. Total Liability = Shareholders’ Funds + Non Current Liabilities + Current Liabilities. .
Thus, total liabilities represent the total amount of money the company owes to
others

55

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 7

Understanding the Balance Sheet
Statement (Part 2)
36

7.1 – The Assets side of Balance Sheet
In the previous chapter we looked at the liability side of the balance sheet in detail.
We will now proceed to understand the 2nd half of the balance sheet i.e the Asset
side of the balance sheet. The Asset side shows us all the assets the company owns
(in different forms) right from its inception. Assets in simple terms are the resources
held by a company, which help in generating the revenues. Here is the snapshot of
the Assets side of the balance sheet:

As you can see the Asset side has two main sections i.e Non-current assets and
Current assets. Both these sections have several line items (with associated notes)
included within. We will look into each one of these line items.

56

7.2 – Non-current assets (Fixed Assets)
Similar to what we learnt in the previous chapter, non-current assets talks about the
assets that the company owns, the economic benefit of which is enjoyed over a long
period (beyond 365 days). Remember an asset owned by a company is expected to
give the company an economic benefit over its useful life.
If you notice within the non-current assets there is a subsection called “Fixed Assets”
with many line items under it. Fixed assets are assets (both tangible and intangible)
that the company owns which cannot be converted to cash easily or which cannot
be liquidated easily. Typical examples of fixed assets are land, plant and machinery,
vehicles, building etc. Intangible assets are also considered fixed assets because
they benefit companies over a long period of time. If you see, all the line items
within fixed assets have a common note, numbered 10, which we will explore in
great detail shortly.
Here is the snapshot of fixed assets of Amara Raja Batteries Limited:

The first line item ‘Tangible Assets’ is valued at Rs.619.8Crs. Tangible assets consists
of assets which has a physical form. In other words these assets can be seen or
touched. This usually includes plant and machinery, vehicles, buildings, fixtures etc.
Likewise the next line item reports the value of Intangible assets valued at Rs.3.2
Crs. Intangible assets are assets which have an economic value, but do not have a
physical nature. This usually includes patents, copyrights, trademarks, designs etc.

57

Remember when we discussed the P&L statement we discussed depreciation.
Depreciation is a way of spreading the cost of acquiring the asset over its useful life.
The value of the assets deplete over time, as the assets lose their productive
capacity due to obsolescence and physical wear and tear. This value is called the
Depreciation expense, which is shown in the Profit and Loss account and the
Balance Sheet.
All the assets should be depreciated over its useful life. Keeping this in perspective,
when the company acquires an asset it is called the ‘Gross Block’. Depreciation
should be deducted from the Gross block, after which we can arrive at the ‘Net
Block’.
Net Block = Gross Block –Accumulated Depreciation
Note, the term ‘Accumulated’ is used to indicate all the depreciation value since the
incorporation of the company.
When we read tangible assets at Rs.619.8 Crs and Intangible assets at Rs.3.2 Crs, do
remember the company is reporting its Net block, which is Net of Accumulated
depreciation. Have a look at the Note 10, which is associated with fixed assets.

At the top of the note you can see the Gross Block, Depreciation/amortization, and
Net block being highlighted. I have also highlighted two net block numbers which
tallies with what was mentioned in the balance sheet.
Let us look at a few more interesting aspects on this note. Notice under Tangible
assets you can see the list of all the assets the company owns.

58

For example, the company has listed ‘Buildings’ as one of its tangible asset. I have
highlighted this part:-

As of 31st March 2013 (FY13) ARBL reported the value of the building at Rs.93.4 Crs.
During the FY14 the company added Rs.85.8Crs worth of building, this amount is
classified as ‘additions during the year’. Further they also wound up 0.668 Crs worth
of building; this amount is classified as ‘deductions during the year’. Hence the
current year value of the building would be:
Previous year’s value of building + addition during this year – deduction during the
year
93.4 + 85.8 – 0.668
= 178.5Crs

59

You can notice this number being highlighted in blue in the above image. Do
remember this is the gross block of the building. From the gross block one needs to
deduct the accumulated depreciation to arrive at the ‘Net Block’. In the snapshot
below, I have highlighted the depreciation section belonging to the ‘Building’.

As of 31st March 2013 (FY13) ARBL has depreciated Rs.17.2 Crs, to which they need
to add Rs.2.8 Crs belonging to the year FY14, adjust 0.376 Crs as the deduction for
the year. Thus, the Total Depreciation for the year is:Previous year’s depreciation value + Current year’s depreciation – Deduction for the
year
= 17.2 + 2.8 – 0.376
Total Depreciation= Rs.19.736 Crs. This is highlighted in red in the image above.
So, we have building gross block at Rs.178.6 Crs and depreciation at Rs.19.73 Crs
which gives us a net block of Rs.158.8 Crs ( 178.6– 19.73). The same has been
highlighted in the image below:

60

The same exercise is carried out for all the other tangible and intangible assets to
arrive at the Total Net block number.
The next two line items under the fixed assets are Capital work in progress (CWIP)
and Intangible assets under development.
CWIP includes building under construction, machinery under assembly etc at the
time of preparing the balance sheet. Hence it is aptly called the “Capital Work in
Progress”. This amount is usually mentioned in the Net block section. CWIP is the
work that is not yet complete but where a capital expenditure has already been
incurred. As we can see, ARBL has Rs.144.3 Crs under CWIP. Once the construction
process is done and the asset is put to use, the asset is moved to tangible assets
(under fixed assets) from CWIP.
The last line item is ‘Intangible assets under development’. This is similar to CWIP
but for intangible assets. The work in process could be patent filing, copyright filing,
brand development etc. This is at a miniscule cost of 0.3 Crs for ARBL. All these costs
are added to arrive at the total fixed cost of the company.

7.3 – Non-current assets (Other line items)
Besides the fixed assets under the non-current assets, there are other line items as
well. Here is a snapshot for the same:

Non-current investments are investments made by ARBL with a long term
perspective. This stands at Rs.16.07 Crs. The investment could be anything – buying

61

listed equity shares, minority stake in other companies, debentures, mutual funds
etc. Here is the partial (as I could not fit the entire image) snapshot of Note 11. This
should give you a perspective.

The next line item is long term loans and advances which stand at Rs.56.7Crs. These
are loans and advances given out by the company to other group companies,
employees, suppliers, vendors etc.
The last line item under the Non-current assets is ‘Other Non-current assets’ which
is at Rs. 0.122 Crs. This includes other miscellaneous long term assets.

62

7.4 – Current assets
Current assets are assets that can be easily converted to cash and the company
foresees a situation of consuming these assets within 365 days. Current assets are
the assets that a company uses to fund its day to day operations and ongoing
expenses.
The most common current assets are cash and cash equivalents, inventories,
receivables, short term loans and advances and sundry debtors.
Here is the snapshot of the current assets of ARBL:

The first line item on the Current assets is Inventory which stands at Rs.335.0 Crs.
Inventory includes all the finished goods manufactured by the company, raw
materials in stock, goods that are manufactured incompletely etc. Inventories are
goods at various stages of production and hence have not been sold. When any
product is manufactured in a company it goes through various processes from raw
material, to work in progress to a finished good. Snapshot of Note 14 associated
with inventory of the company is as shown below:

As you can see, a bulk of the inventory value comes from ‘Raw material’ and ‘Workin- progress’.
The next line item is ‘Trade Receivables’ also referred to as ‘Accounts Receivables’.
This represents the amount of money that the company is expected to receive from
its distributors, customers and other related parties. The trade receivable for ARBL
stands at Rs.452.7 Crs.
The next line item is the Cash and Cash equivalents, which are considered the most
liquid assets found in the Balance sheet of any company. Cash comprises of cash on

63

hand and cash on demand. Cash equivalents are short term, highly liquid
investments which has a maturity date of less than three months from its
acquisition date. This stands at Rs.294.5 Crs. Note 16 associated with Cash and bank
balances is as shown below. As you can see the company has cash parked in various
types of accounts.

The next line item is short-term loans and advances, that the company has tendered
and which is expected to be repaid back to the company within 365 days. It includes
various items such as advances to suppliers, loans to customers, loans to
employees, advance tax payments (income tax, wealth tax) etc. This stands at
Rs.211.9 Crs. Following this, is the last line item on the Assets side and infact on the
Balance sheet itself. This is the ‘Other current assets’ which are not considered
important, hence termed ‘Other’. This stands at Rs.4.3 Crs.
To sum up, the Total Assets of the company would now be:Fixed Assets + Current Assets
= Rs.840.831 Crs + Rs.1298.61 Crs
= Rs. 2139.441 Crs, which is exactly equal to the liabilities of the company.
With this we have now run through the entire Assets side of the Balance sheet, and
infact the whole of Balance sheet itself. Let us relook at the balance sheet in its
entirety:

64

As you can see in the above, the balance sheet equation holds true for ARBL’s
balance sheet,
Asset = Shareholders’ Funds + Liabilities
Do remember, over the last few chapters we have only inspected the balance sheet
and the P&L statements. However, we have not analyzed the data to infer if the
numbers are good or bad. We will do the same when we look into the financial ratio
analysis chapter.
In the next chapter, we will look into the last financial statement which is the cash
flow statement. However, before we conclude this chapter we must look into the
many ways the Balance sheet and the P&L statement are interconnected.

7.5 – Connecting the P&L and Balance Sheet
Let us now focus on the Balance Sheet and the P&L statement and the multiple
ways they are connected (or affect) to each other.
Have a look at the following image:

65

In the image above, on the left hand side we have the line items on a typical
standard P&L statement. Corresponding to that on the right hand side we have
some of the standard Balance Sheet items. From the previous chapters, you already
know what each of these line items mean. However, we will now understand how
the line items in the P&L and the Balance Sheet are connected to each other.
To begin with, consider the Revenue from Sales. When a company makes a sale it
incurs expenses. For example if the company undertakes an advertisement
campaign to spread awareness about its products, then naturally the company has
to spend cash on the campaign. The money spent tends to decrease the cash
balance. Also, if the company makes a sale on credit, the Receivables (Accounts
Receivables) go higher.
Operating expenses includes purchase of raw material, finished goods and other
similar expenses. When a company incurs these expenses, to manufacture goods
two things happen. One, if the purchase is on credit (which invariably is) then
the Trade payables (accounts payable) go higher. Two, the Inventory level also
gets affected. Whether the inventory value is high or low, depends on how much
time the company needs to sell its products.
When companies purchase Tangible assets or invest in Brand building exercises
(Intangible assets) the company spreads the purchase value of the asset over the
economic useful life of the asset. This tends to increase
the depreciation mentioned in the Balance sheet. Do remember the Balance sheet
is prepared on a flow basis, hence the Depreciation in balance sheet is accumulated
year on year. Please note, Depreciation in Balance sheet is referred to as
the Accumulated depreciation.
Other income includes monies received in the form of interest income, sale of
subsidiary companies, rental income etc. Hence, when companies
undertake investment activities, the other incomes tend to get affected.
As and when the company undertakes Debt (it could be short term or long term),
the company obviously spends money towards financing the debt. The money that
goes towards financing the debt is called the Finance Cost/Borrowing Cost. Hence,
when debt increases the finance cost also increases and vice versa.

66

Finally, as you may recall the Profit after tax (PAT) adds to the surplus of the
company which is a part of the Shareholders equity.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. The Assets side of the Balance sheet displays all the assets the company owns
2. Assets are expected to give an economic benefit during its useful life
3. Assets are classified as Non-current and Current asset
4. The useful life of Non-current assets is expected to last beyond 365 days or 12
months
5. Current assets are expected to payoff within 365 days or 12 months
6. Assets inclusive of depreciation are called the ‘Gross Block’
7. Net Block = Gross Block – Accumulated Depreciation
8. The sum of all assets should equal the sum of all liabilities. Only then the Balance
sheet is said to have balanced.
9. The Balance sheet and P&L statement are inseparable. They are connected to each
other in many ways.

67

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 8

The Cash Flow statement
73

8.1 – Overview
The Cash flow statement is a very important financial statement, as it reveals how
much cash the company is actually generating. Is this information not revealed in
the P&L statement you may think? Well, the answer is both a yes and a no.
Consider the following scenario.
Assume a simple coffee shop selling coffee and short eats. All the sales the shop
does is mostly on cash basis, meaning if a customer wants to have a cup of coffee
and a snack, he needs to have enough money to buy what he wants. Going by that
on a particular day, assume the shop manages to sell Rs.2,500/- worth of coffee and
Rs.3,000/- worth of snacks. It is evident that the shop’s income is Rs.5,500/- for that
day. Rs.5,500/- is reported as revenues in P&L, and there is no ambiguity with this.
Now think about another business that sells laptops. For sake of simplicity, let us
assume that the shop sells only 1 type of laptop at a standard fixed rate of
Rs.25,000/- per laptop. Assume on a certain day, the shop manages to sells 20 such
laptops. Clearly the revenue for the shop would be Rs.25,000 x 20 = Rs.500,000/-.
But what if 5 of the 20 laptops were sold on credit? A credit sale is when the
customer takes the product today but pays the cash at a later point in time. In this
situation here is how the numbers would look:
Cash sale: 15 * 25000 = Rs.375,000/Credit sale: 5 * 25000 = Rs.125,000/Total sales: Rs.500,000/If this shop was to show its total revenue in its P&L statement, you would just see a
revenue of Rs.500,000/- which may seem good on the face of it. However, how
much of this Rs.500,000/- is actually present in the company’s bank account is not
clear. What if this company had a loan of Rs.400,000/- that had to be repaid back
urgently? Even though the company has a sale of Rs.500,000 it has only Rs.375,000/in its account. This means the company has a cash crunch, as it cannot meet its debt
obligations.
The cash flow statement captures this information. A statement of cash flows
should be presented as an integral part of an entity’s financial statements. Hence in

68

this context evaluation of the cash flow statement is highly critical as it reveals
amongst other things, the true cash position of the company.
To sum up, every company’s financial performance is not so much dependent on
the profits earned during a period, but more realistically on liquidity or cash flows.

8.2 – Activities of a company
Before we go ahead to understand the cash flow statement, it is important to
understand ‘the activities’ of a company. If you think about a company and the
various business activities it undertakes, you will realize that the company’s activities
can be classified under one of the three standard baskets. We will understand this
in terms of an example.
Imagine a business, maybe a very well established fitness center (Talwalkars, Gold’s
Gym etc) with a sound corporate structure. What are the typical business activities
you think a fitness center would have? Let me go ahead and list a few business
activities:
1. Display advertisements to attract new customers
2. Hire fitness instructors to help clients in their fitness workout
3. Buy new fitness equipments to replace worn out equipments
4. Seek short term loan from bankers
5. Issue a certificate of deposit for raising funds
6. Issue new shares to a few known friends to raise fresh capital for expansion (also
called preferential allotment)
7. Invest in a startup company working towards innovative fitness regimes
8. Park excess money (if any) in fixed deposits
9. Invest in a building coming up in the neighborhood, for opening a new fitness
center sometime in the future
10. Upgrade the sound system for a better workout experience

69

As you can see the above listed business activities are quite diverse however they
are all related to the business. We can classify these activities as:
1. Operational activities (OA): Activities that are directly related to the daily core
business operations are called operational activities. Typical operating activities
include sales, marketing, manufacturing, technology upgrade, resource hiring etc.
2. Investing activities (IA): Activities pertaining to investments that the company
makes with an intention of reaping benefits at a later stage. Examples include
parking money in interest bearing instruments, investing in equity shares, investing
in land, property, plant and equipment, intangibles and other non current assets etc
3. Financing activities (FA): Activities pertaining to all financial transactions of the
company such as distributing dividends, paying interest to service debt, raising fresh
debt, issuing corporate bonds etc
All activities a legitimate company performs can be classified under one of the
above three mentioned categories.
Keeping the above three activities in perspective, we will now classify each of the
above mentioned activities into one of the three categories /baskets.
1. Display advertisements to attract new customers – OA
2. Hire fitness instructors to help customers with their fitness workout – OA
3. Buy new fitness equipment to replace worn out equipments – OA
4. Seek a short term loan from bankers – FA
5. Issue a certificate of deposit (CD) for raising funds – FA
6. Issue new shares to few known friends to raise fresh capital for expansion (also
called preferential allotment) – FA
7. Invest in a startup company working towards innovative fitness regimes – IA
8. Park excess money (if any) in fixed deposit – IA
9. Invest in a building coming up in the neighborhood for opening a new fitness center
sometime in the future – IA
10. Upgrade the sound system for better workout experience- OA
Now think about the cash moving in and out of the company and its impact on the
cash balance. Each activity that the company undertakes has an impact on cash. For
example “Upgrade the sound system for a better workout experience” means the
company has to pay money towards the purchase of a new sound system, hence
the cash balance decreases. Also, it is interesting to note that the new sound system
itself will be treated as a company asset.
Keeping this in perspective, we will now understand for the example given above
how the various activities listed would impact the cash balance and how would it
impact the balance sheet.

70

Activity
No

Activity
Type

Rational

Cash
Balance

On Balance Sheet

01

OA

Expenditure towards
advertisement

Decreases

Treated as an asset as it increases
the brand value

02

OA

Expenditure towards new
recruits

Decreases

Treated as an asset as it increases
the company’s intellectual capital

03

OA

Expenditure towards new
equipment

Decreases

Treated as asset

04

FA

Loan means cash inflow to
business

Increases

Loan is a liability

05

FA

Deposits via CD means cash
inflow

Increases

CD is a liability

06

FA

Issue of fresh capital means cash
inflow

Increases

Treated as a liability as share capital
increases

07

IA

Investment in startup means
cash outflow

Decreases

Investment is an asset

08

IA

Money parked in FD means cash
Decreases
going out of business

Equivalent to cash, hence
considered an asset

09

IA

Investment in building means
cash going out of business

Decreases

Gross block considered an asset

10

OA

Expenditure towards the sound
system

Decreases

Treated as an asset

The table above is colour coded:

71

1. Increase in cash is colour coded in blue
2. Decrease in cash is colour coded in red
3. Assets are colour coded in green and
4. Liabilities are colour coded in purple.
If you look through the table and start correlating the ‘Cash Balance’ and
‘Asset/Liability’ you will observe that:
1. Whenever the liabilities of the company increases the cash balance also increases
1. This means if the liabilities decreases, the cash balance also decreases

2. Whenever the asset of the company increases, the cash balance decreases
1. This means if the assets decreases, the cash balance increases

The above conclusion is the key concept while constructing a cash flow statement.
Also, extending this further you will realize that each activity of the company be it
operating activity, financing activity, or investing activity either produces cash (net
increase in cash) or reduces (net decrease in cash)the cash for the company.
Hence the total cash flow for the company will be:-

Cash Flow of the company = Net cash flow from operating activities + Net Cash flow from investing
activities + Net cash flow from financing activities

8.3 – The Cash Flow Statement
Having some insight into the cash flow statement, you would now appreciate the
fact that you need to look into the cash flow statement to review the company from
a cash perspective.
Typically when companies present their cash flow statement they split the
statement into three segments to explicitly show how much cash the company has
generated across the three business activities. Continuing with our example from
the earlier chapters, here is the cash flow statement of Amara Raja Batteries Limited
(ARBL):

72

I will skip going through each line item as most of them are self explanatory,
however I want you to notice that ARBL has generated Rs.278.7 Crs from operating
activities. Note, a company which has a positive cash flow from operating activities
is always a sign of financial well being.
Here is the snapshot of ARBL’s cash flow from investing activities:

As you can see, ARBL has consumed Rs.344.8 Crs in its investing activities. This is
quite intuitive as investing activities tend to consume cash. Also remember healthy

73

investing activities foretells the investor that the company is serious about its
business expansion. Of course how much is considered healthy and how much is
not, is something we will understand as we proceed through this module.
Finally, here is the snapshot of ARBL’s cash balance from financing activities:

ARBL consumed Rs.53.1Crs through its financing activities. If you notice the bulk of
the money went in paying dividends. Also, if ARBL takes on new debt in future it
would lead to an increase in the cash balance (remember increase in liabilities,
increases cash balance). We know from the balance sheet that ARBL did not
undertake any new debt.
Let us summarize the cash flow from all the activities:

Cash Flow from

Rupees Crores (2013-14)

Rupees Crores (2012-13)

Operating Activities

278.7

335.4

Investing Activities

(344.8)

(120.05)

Financing Activities

(53.1)

(34.96)

Total

(119.19)

179.986

This means the company consumed a total cash of Rs.119.19 Crs for the financial
year 2013 -2014. Fair enough, but what about the cash from the previous year? As
we can see, the company generated Rs.179.986 Crs through all its activities from the
previous year. Here is an extract from ARBL’s cash flow statement:

74

Look at the section highlighted in green (for the year 2013-14). It says the opening
balance for the year is Rs.409.46Crs. How did they get this? Well, this happens to be
the closing balance for the previous year (refer to the arrow marks). Add to this the
current year’s cash equivalents which is (Rs.119.19) Crs along with a minor forex
exchange difference of Rs.2.58 Crs we get the total cash position of the company
which is Rs.292.86 Crs. This means, while the company guzzled cash on a yearly
basis, they still have adequate cash, thanks to the carry forward from the previous
year.
Note, the closing balance of 2013-14 will now be the opening balance for the FY
2014 – 15. You can watch out for this when ARBL provides its cash flow numbers for
the year ended 31st March 2015.
At this point, let us run through a few interesting questions and answers:
1. What does Rs.292.86 Crs actually state?
1. This literally shows how much cash ARBL has in its various bank accounts

2. What is cash?
1. Cash comprises cash on hand and demand deposits. Obviously, this is a liquid asset of the
company

3. What are liquid assets?
1. Liquid assets are assets that can be easily converted to cash or cash equivalents

4. Are liquid assets similar to ‘current items’ that we looked at in the Balance sheet?
1. Yes, you can think of it that way

5. If cash is current and cash is an asset, shouldn’t it reflect under the current asset on
the Balance sheet?
1. Exactly and here it is. Look at the balance sheet extract below.

75

Clearly, we can now infer that the cash flow statement and the balance sheet
interact with each other. This is in line with what we had discussed earlier i.e all the
three financial statements are interconnected with each other.

8.4 – A brief on the financial statements
Over the last few chapters we have discussed the three important financial
statements of the company i.e the P&L statement, the Balance Sheet and the Cash
Flow statement of the company. While the Cash flow and P&L statement are
prepared on a standalone basis (representing the financial position for the given
year), the Balance Sheet is prepared on a flow basis.
The P&L statement discusses how much the company earned as revenues versus
how much the company expended in terms of expenses. The retained earnings of
the company also called the surplus of the company are carried forward to the
balance sheet. The P&L also incorporates the depreciation number. The
depreciation mentioned in the P&L statement is carried forward to the balance
sheet.
The Balance Sheet details the company’s assets and liabilities. On the liabilities side
of the Balance sheet the company represents the shareholders’ funds. The assets
should always be equal to the liabilities, only then do we say the balance sheet has
balanced. One of the key details on the balance sheet is the cash and cash
equivalents of the firm. This number tells us, how much money the company has in
its bank account. This number comes from the cash flow statement.
The cash flow statement provides information to the users of the financial
statements about the entity’s ability to generate cash and cash equivalents as well
as indicates the cash needs of a company. The statement of cash flows are prepared
on a historical basis providing information about the cash and cash equivalents,
classifying cash flows in to operating, financing and investing activities. The final
number of the cash flow tells us how much money the company has in its bank
account.
We have so far looked into how to read the financial statements and what to expect
out of each one of them. We have not yet ventured into how to analyze these
numbers. One of the ways to analyze the financial numbers is by calculating a few
important financial ratios. In fact we will focus on the financial ratios in the next few
chapters.

76

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. The Cash flow statement gives us a picture of the true cash position of the company
2. A legitimate company has three main activities – operating activities, investing
activities and the financing activities
3. Each activity either generates or drains money for the company
4. The net cash flow for the company is the sum of operating activities, investing
activities and the financing activities
5. Investors should specifically look at the cash flow from operating activities of the
company
6. When the liabilities increase, cash level increases and vice versa
7. When the assets increase, cash level decreases and vice versa
8. The net cash flow number for the year is also reflected in the balance sheet
9. The Statement of Cash flow is a useful addition to the financial statements of a
company because it indicates the company’s performance.

77

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 9

The Financial Ratio Analysis (Part 1)
133

9.1 – A note on Financial Ratios
Over the last few chapters we have understood how to read the financial
statements. We will now focus our attention on analyzing these financial
statements. The best way to analyze the financial statements is by studying the
‘Financial Ratios’. The theory of financial ratios was made popular by Benjamin
Graham, who is popularly known as the father of fundamental analysis. Financial
ratios help in interpreting the results, and allows comparison with previous years
and other companies in the same industry.
A typical financial ratio utilizes data from the financial statement to compute its
value. Before we start understanding the financial ratios, we need to be aware of
certain attributes of the financial ratios.
On its own merit, the financial ratio of a company conveys very little information.
For instance, assume Ultratech Cements Limited has a profit margin of 15%, how
useful do you think this information is? Well, not much really. 15% profit margin is
good, but how would I know if it is the best?
However, assume you figure out ACC Cement’s profit margin is 12%. Now, as we
comparing two similar companies, comparing the profitability makes sense. Clearly,
Ultratech Cements Limited seems to be a more profitable company between the
two. The point that I am trying to drive across is that more often than not, Financial
Ratios on its own is quite mute. The ratio makes sense only when you compare the
ratio with another company of a similar size or when you look into the trend of the
financial ratio. This means that once the ratio is computed the ratio has to be
analyzed (either by comparison or tracking the ratio’s historical trend) to get the
best possible inference.
Also, here is something that you need to be aware off while computing ratios.
Accounting policies may vary across companies and across different financial years.
A fundamental analyst should be cognizant of this fact and should adjust the data
accordingly, before computing the financial ratio.

78

9.2 – The Financial Ratios
Financial ratios can be ‘somewhat loosely’ classified into different categories, namely
–
1. Profitability Ratios
2. Leverage Ratios
3. Valuation Ratios
4. Operating Ratios

The Profitability ratios help the analyst measure the profitability of the company.
The ratios convey how well the company is able to perform in terms of generating
profits. Profitability of a company also signals the competitiveness of the
management. As the profits are needed for business expansion and to pay
dividends to its shareholders a company’s profitability is an important consideration
for the shareholders.

The Leverage ratios also referred to as solvency ratios/ gearing ratios measures
the company’s ability (in the long term) to sustain its day to day operations.
Leverage ratios measure the extent to which the company uses the debt to finance
growth. Remember for the company to sustain its operations, it has to pay its bills
and obligations. Solvency ratios help us understand the company’s long term
sustainability, keeping its obligation in perspective.

79

The Valuation ratios compare the stock price of the company with either the
profitability of the company or the overall value of company to get a sense of how
cheap or expensive the stock is trading. Thus this ratio helps us in analysing
whether the current share price of the company is perceived as high or low. In
simpler words, the valuation ratio compares the cost of a security with the perks of
owning the stock.

The Operating Ratios, also called the ‘Activity Ratios’ measures the efficiency at
which a business can convert its assets (both current and noncurrent) into
revenues. This ratio helps us understand how efficient the management of the
company is. For this reason, Operating Ratios are sometimes called the
‘Management Ratios’.
Strictly speaking, ratios (irrespective of the category it belongs to) convey a certain
message, usually related to the financial position of the company. For example,
‘Profitability Ratio’ can convey the efficiency of the company, which is usually
measured by computing the ‘Operating Ratio’. Because of such overlaps, it is difficult
to classify these ratios. Hence the ratios are ‘somewhat loosely’ classified.

9.3 – The Profitability Ratios
We will look into the following ratios under ‘The Profitability Ratio’:
1. EBITDA Margin (Operating Profit Margin)
o

EBITDA Growth (CAGR)

2. PAT Margin
o

PAT Growth (CAGR)

80

3. Return on Equity (ROE)
4. Return on Asset (ROA)
5. Return on Capital Employed (ROCE)
EBITDA Margin:
The Earnings before Interest Tax Depreciation & Amortization (EBITDA)
Margin indicates the efficiency of the management. It tells us how efficient the
company’s operating model is. EBITDA Margin tells us how profitable (in percentage
terms) the company is at an operating level. It always makes sense to compare the
EBITDA margin of the company versus its competitor to get a sense of the
management’s efficiency in terms of managing their expense.
In order to calculate the EBITDA Margin, we first need to calculate the EBITDA itself.
EBITDA = [Operating Revenues – Operating Expense]
Operating Revenues = [Total Revenue – Other Income]
Operating Expense = [Total Expense – Finance Cost – Depreciation & Amortization]
EBIDTA Margin = EBITDA / [Total Revenue – Other Income]
Continuing the example of Amara Raja Batteries Limited, the EBITDA Margin
calculation for the FY14 is as follows:
We first calculate EBITDA , which is computed as follows:
[Total Revenue – Other Income] – [Total Expense – Finance Cost – Depreciation &
Amortization]
Note: Other income is income by virtue of investments and other non operational
activity. Including other income in EBITDA calculation would clearly skew the data.
For this reason, we have to exclude Other Income from Total Revenues.
[3482 – 46] – [2942 – 0.7 – 65]
= [3436] – [2876]
= 560 Crores
Hence the EBITDA Margin is:
560 / 3436
= 16.3%
I have two questions for you at this stage:

81

1. What does an EBITDA of Rs.560 Crs and an EBITDA margin of 16.3% indicate?
2. How good or bad an EBITDA margin of 16.3% is?
The first question is a fairly simple. An EBITDA of Rs.560 Crs means that the
company has retained Rs.560 Crs from its operating revenue of Rs.3436 Crs. This
also means out of Rs.3436 Crs the company spent Rs.2876 Crs towards its expenses.
In percentage terms, the company spent 83.7% of its revenue towards its expenses
and retained 16.3% of the revenue at the operating level, for its operations.
Now for the 2nd question, hopefully you should not have an answer.
Remember we did discuss this point earlier in this chapter. A financial ratio on its
own conveys very little information. To make sense of it, we should either see the
trend or compare it with its peers. Going with this, a 16.3% EBITDA margin conveys
very little information.
To makes some sense of the EBITDA margin, let us look at Amara Raja’s EBITDA
margin trend for the last 4 years, (all numbers in Rs Crs, except EBITDA margin):

Year

Operating Revenues

Operating Expense

EBITDA

EBITDA Margin

2011

1761

1504

257

14.6%

2012

2364

2025

340

14.4%

2013

2959

2508

451

15.2%

2014

3437

2876

560

16.3%

It appears that ARBL has maintained its EBITDA at an average of 15%, and in fact on
a closer look it is clear the EBITDA margin is increasing. This is a good sign as it
shows consistency and efficiency in the management’s operational capabilities.
In 2011 the EBITDA was Rs.257 Crs and in 2014 the EBITDA is Rs.560Crs. This
translates to a 4 year EBITDA CAGR growth of 21%.
Please note, we have discussed the formula for CAGR in module 1.
Clearly, it appears that both EBITDA margin and EBITDA growth are quite
impressive. However we still do not know if it is the best. In order to find out if it is
the best one needs to compare these numbers with its competitors. In case of ARBL

82

it would be Exide batteries Limited. I would encourage you to do the same for Exide
and compare the results.
PAT Margin:
While the EBITDA margin is calculated at the operating level, the Profit After Tax
(PAT) margin is calculated at the final profitability level. At the operating level we
consider only the operating expenses however there are other expenses such as
depreciation and finance costs which are not considered. Along with these expenses
there are tax expenses as well. When we calculate the PAT margin, all expenses are
deducted from the Total Revenues of the company to identify the overall
profitability of the company.
PAT Margin = [PAT/Total Revenues]
PAT is explicitly stated in the Annual Report. ARBL’s PAT for the FY14 is Rs.367 Crs on
the overall revenue of Rs.3482 Crs (including other income). This translates to a PAT
margin of:
= 367 / 3482
=10.5 %
Here is the PAT and PAT margin trend for ARBL:

Year

PAT (in INR Crs)

PAT Margin

2011

148

8.4%

2012

215

8.9%

2013

287

9.6%

2014

367

10.5%

The PAT and PAT margin trend seems impressive as we can clearly see a margin
expansion. The 4 year CAGR growth stands at 25.48%, which is again good. Needless
to say, it always makes sense to compare ratios with its competitors.
Return on Equity (RoE):

83

The Return on Equity (RoE) is a very important ratio, as it helps the investor assess
the return the shareholder earns for every unit of capital invested. RoE measures
the entity’s ability to generate profits from the shareholders investments. In other
words, RoE shows the efficiency of the company in terms of generating profits to its
shareholders. Obviously, higher the RoE, the better it is for the shareholders. In fact
this is one of the key ratios that helps the investor identify investable attributes of
the company. To give you a perspective, the average RoE of top Indian companies
vary between 14 – 16%. I personally prefer to invest in companies that have a RoE of
18% upwards.
This ratio is compared with the other companies in the same industry and is also
observed over time.
Also note, if the RoE is high, it means a good amount of cash is being generated by
the company, hence the need for external funds is less. Thus a higher ROE indicates
a higher level of management performance.
RoE can be calculated as: [Net Profit / Shareholders Equity* 100]
There is no doubt that RoE is an important ratio to calculate, but like any other
financial ratios it also has a few drawbacks. To help you understand its drawbacks,
consider this hypothetical example.
Assume Vishal runs a Pizza store. To bake pizza’s Vishal needs an oven which costs
him Rs.10,000/-. Oven is an asset to Vishal’s business. He procures the oven from his
own funds and seeks no external debt. At this stage you would agree on his balance
sheet he has a shareholder equity of Rs.10,000 and an asset equivalent to Rs.10,000.
Now, assume in his first year of operation, Vishal generates a profit of Rs.2500/-.
What is his RoE? This is quite simple to compute:
RoE = 2500/10000*100
=25.0%.
Now let us twist the story a bit. Vishal has only Rs.8000/- he borrows Rs.2000 from
his father to purchase an oven worth Rs.10000/-. How do you think his balance
sheet would look?
On the liability side he would have:
Shareholder Equity = Rs.8000
Debt = Rs.2000
This makes Vishal’s total liability Rs. 10,000. Balancing this on the asset side, he has
an asset worth Rs.10,000. Let us see how his RoE looks now:

84

RoE = 2500 / 8000*100
= 31.25%
With an additional debt, the RoE shot up quite significantly. Now, what if Vishal had
only Rs.5000 and borrowed the additional Rs.5000 from his father to buy the oven.
His balance sheet would look like this:
On the liability side he would have:
Shareholder Equity = Rs.5000
Debt = Rs.5000
Vishal’s total liability is Rs. 10,000. Balancing this on the asset side, he has an asset
worth Rs.10,000. Let us see how his RoE looks now:
RoE = 2500 / 5000 *100
=50.0%
Clearly, higher the debt Vishal seeks to finance his asset, (which in turn is required
to generate profits) higher is the RoE. A high RoE is great, but certainly not at the
cost of high debt. The problem is with a high amount of debt, running the business
gets very risky as the finance cost increases drastically. For this reason inspecting
the RoE closely becomes extremely important. One way to do this is by
implementing a technique called the ‘DuPont Model’ also called DuPont Identity.
This model was developed in 1920’s by the DuPont Corporation. DuPont Model
breaks up the RoE formula into three components with each part representing a
certain aspect of business. The DuPont analysis uses both the P&L statement and
the Balance sheet for the computation.
The RoE as per DuPont model can be calculated as:

If you notice the above formula, the denominator and the numerator cancels out
with one another eventually leaving us with the original RoE formula which is:
RoE = Net Profit / Shareholder Equity *100
However in the process of decomposing the RoE formula, we gained insights into
three distinct aspects of the business. Let us look into the three components of the
DuPont model that makes up the RoE formula :

85

o

Net Profit Margin = Net Profits/ Net Sales*100
This is the first part of the DuPont Model and it expresses the company’s ability to
generate profits. This is nothing but the PAT margin we looked at earlier in this
chapter. A low Net profit margin would indicate higher costs and increased
competition.

o

Asset Turnover = Net Sales / Average Total asset
Asset turnover ratio is an efficiency ratio that indicates how efficiently the company
is using its assets to generate revenue. Higher the ratio, it means the company is
using its assets more efficiently. Lower the ratio, it could indicate management or
production problems. The resulting figure is expressed as number of times per year.

o

Financial Leverage = Average Total Assets / Shareholders Equity
Financial leverage helps us answer this question – ‘For every unit of shareholders
equity, how many units of assets does the company have’. For example if the
financial leverage is 4, this means for every Rs.1 of equity, the company supports
Rs.4 worth of assets. Higher the financial leverage along with increased amounts of
debt, will indicate the company is highly leveraged and hence the investor should
exercise caution. The resulting figure is expressed as number of times per year.
As you can see, the DuPont model breaks up the RoE formula into three distinct
components, with each component giving an insight into the company’s operating
and financial capabilities.
Let us now proceed to implement the DuPont Model to calculate Amara Raja’s RoE
for the FY 14. For this we need to calculate the values of the individual components.
Net Profit Margin: As I mentioned earlier, this is same as the PAT margin. From our
calculation earlier, we know the Net Profit Margin for ARBL is 9.2%
Asset Turnover = Net Sales / Average Total assets
We know from the FY14 Annual Report, Net sales of ARBL stands at Rs.3437 Crs.
The denominator has Average Total Assets which we know can be sourced from the
Balance Sheet. But what does the word ‘Average’ indicate?
From ARBL’s balance sheet, the total asset for FY14 is Rs.2139Crs. But think about
this, the reported number is for the Financial Year 2014, which starts from 1st of
April 2013 and close on 31st March 2014. This implies that at the start of the financial
year 2014 (1st April 2013), the company must have commenced its operation with
assets that it carried forward from the previous financial year (FY 2013). During the
financial year (FY 2014) the company has acquired some more assets which when
added to the previous year’s (FY2013) assets totaled to Rs.2139 Crs. Clearly the
company started the financial year with a certain rupee value of assets but closed
the year with a totally different rupee value of assets.

86

Keeping this in perspective, if I were to calculate the asset turnover ratio, which
asset value should I consider for the denominator? Should I consider the asset value
at the beginning of the year or at the asset value at the end of the year? To avoid
confusion, the practice is to take average of the asset values for the two financial
years.
Do remember this technique of averaging line items, as we will be using this across
other ratios as well.
From ARBL’s annual report we know:
Net Sales in FY14 is Rs.3437Crs
Total Assets in FY13 is Rs.1770 Crs
Total Assets in FY14 is Rs.2139 Crs
Average Assets = (1770 + 2139) / 2
= 1955
Asset Turnover = 3437 / 1955
= 1.75 times
This means for every Rs.1 of asset deployed, the company is generating Rs.1.75 in
revenues.
We will now calculate the last component that is the Financial Leverage.
Financial Leverage = Average Total Assets / Average Shareholders Equity
We know the average total assets is Rs.1955. We just need to look into the
shareholders equity. For reasons similar to taking the “Average Assets” as opposed
to just the current year assets, we will consider “Average Shareholder equity” as
opposed to just the current year’s shareholder equity.
Shareholders Equity for FY13 = Rs.1059 Crs
Shareholders Equity for FY14 = Rs.1362 Crs
Average shareholder equity = Rs.1211 Crs
Financial Leverage = 1955 / 1211
= 1.61 times

87

Considering ARBL has little debt, Financial Leverage of 1.61 is indeed an
encouraging number. The number above indicates that for every Rs.1 of Equity,
ARBL supports Rs.1.61 of assets.
We now have all the inputs to calculate RoE for ARBL, we will now proceed to do the
same:
RoE = Net Profit Margin X Asset Turnover X Financial Leverage
= 9.2% * 1.75 * 1.61
~ 25.9%. Quite impressive I must say!
I understand this is a lengthy way to calculate RoE, but this is perhaps the best way
as in the process of calculating RoE, we can develop valuable insights into the
business. DuPont model not only answers what the return is but also the quality of
the return.
However if you wish do a quick RoE calculation you can do so the following way:
RoE = Net Profits / Avg shareholders Equity
From the annual report we know for the FY14 the PAT is Rs.367 Crs
RoE = 367 / 1211
= 30.31%
Return on Asset (RoA):
Having understood the DuPont Model, understanding the next two ratios should be
simple. Return on Assets (RoA) evaluates the effectiveness of the entity’s ability to
use the assets to create profits. A well managed entity limits investments in non
productive assets. Hence RoA indicates the management’s efficiency at deploying its
assets. Needless to say, higher the RoA, the better it is.
RoA = [Net income + interest*(1-tax rate)] / Total Average Assets
From the Annual Report, we know:
Net income for FY 14 = Rs.367.4 Crs
And we know from the Dupont Model the Total average assets (for FY13 and FY14) =
Rs.1955 Crs
So what does interest *(1- tax rate) mean? Well, think about it, the loan taken by
the company is also used to finance the assets which in turn is used to
generate profits. So in a sense, the debtholders (entities who have given loan to the
company) are also a part of the company. From this perspective the interest paid

88

out also belongs to a stakeholder of the company. Also, the company benefits in
terms of paying lesser taxes when interest is paid out, this is called a ‘tax shield’. For
these reasons, we need to add interest (by accounting for the tax shield) while
calculating the ROA.
The Interest amount (finance cost) is Rs.7 Crs, accounting for the tax shield it would
be
= 7* (1 – 32%)
= 4.76 Crs . Please note, 32% is the average tax rate.
Hence ROA would be –
RoA = [367.4 + 4.76] / 1955
~ 372.16 / 1955
~19.03%
Return on Capital Employed (ROCE):
The Return on Capital employed indicates the profitability of the company taking
into consideration the overall capital it employs.
Overall capital includes both equity and debt (both long term and short term).
ROCE = [Profit before Interest & Taxes / Overall Capital Employed]
Overall Capital Employed = Short term Debt + Long term Debt + Equity
From ARBL’s Annual Report we know:
Profit before Interest & Taxes = Rs.537.7 Crs
Overall Capital Employed:
Short term debt: Rs.8.3 Crs
Long term borrowing: Rs.75.9 Crs
Shareholders equity = Rs.1362 Crs
Overall capital employed: 8.3 + 75.9 + 1362 = 1446.2 Crs
ROCE = 537.7 / 1446.2
= 37.18%

89

Key takeaways from this chapter:
1. A Financial ratio is a useful financial metric of a company. On its own merit the ratio
conveys very little information
2. It is best to study the ratio’s recent trend or compare it with the company’s peers to
develop an opinion
3. Financial ratios can be categorized into ‘Profitability’, ‘Leverage’, ‘Valuation’, and
‘Operating’ ratios. Each of these categories give the analyst a certain view on the
company’s business
4. EBITDA is the amount of money the company makes after subtracting the
operational expenses of the company from its operating revenue
5. EBITDA margin indicates the percentage profitability of the company at the
operating level
6. PAT margin gives the overall profitability of the firm
7. Return on Equity (ROE) is a very valuable ratio. It indicates how much return the
shareholders are making over their initial investment in the company
8. A high ROE and a high debt is not a great sign
9. DuPont Model helps in decomposing the ROE into different parts, with each part
throwing light on different aspects of the business
10. DuPont method is probably the best way to calculate the ROE of a firm
11. Return on Assets in an indicator of how efficiently the company is utilizing its assets
12. Return on Capital employed indicates the overall return the company generates
considering both the equity and debt.
13. For the ratios to be useful, it should be analyzed in comparison with other
companies in the same industry.
14. Also, ratios should be analyzed both at a single point in time and as an indicator of
broader trends over time

90

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 9

The Financial Ratio Analysis (Part 1)
133

9.1 – A note on Financial Ratios
Over the last few chapters we have understood how to read the financial
statements. We will now focus our attention on analyzing these financial
statements. The best way to analyze the financial statements is by studying the
‘Financial Ratios’. The theory of financial ratios was made popular by Benjamin
Graham, who is popularly known as the father of fundamental analysis. Financial
ratios help in interpreting the results, and allows comparison with previous years
and other companies in the same industry.
A typical financial ratio utilizes data from the financial statement to compute its
value. Before we start understanding the financial ratios, we need to be aware of
certain attributes of the financial ratios.
On its own merit, the financial ratio of a company conveys very little information.
For instance, assume Ultratech Cements Limited has a profit margin of 15%, how
useful do you think this information is? Well, not much really. 15% profit margin is
good, but how would I know if it is the best?
However, assume you figure out ACC Cement’s profit margin is 12%. Now, as we
comparing two similar companies, comparing the profitability makes sense. Clearly,
Ultratech Cements Limited seems to be a more profitable company between the
two. The point that I am trying to drive across is that more often than not, Financial
Ratios on its own is quite mute. The ratio makes sense only when you compare the
ratio with another company of a similar size or when you look into the trend of the
financial ratio. This means that once the ratio is computed the ratio has to be

91

analyzed (either by comparison or tracking the ratio’s historical trend) to get the
best possible inference.
Also, here is something that you need to be aware off while computing ratios.
Accounting policies may vary across companies and across different financial years.
A fundamental analyst should be cognizant of this fact and should adjust the data
accordingly, before computing the financial ratio.

9.2 – The Financial Ratios
Financial ratios can be ‘somewhat loosely’ classified into different categories, namely
–
1. Profitability Ratios
2. Leverage Ratios
3. Valuation Ratios
4. Operating Ratios

The Profitability ratios help the analyst measure the profitability of the company.
The ratios convey how well the company is able to perform in terms of generating
profits. Profitability of a company also signals the competitiveness of the
management. As the profits are needed for business expansion and to pay
dividends to its shareholders a company’s profitability is an important consideration
for the shareholders.

The Leverage ratios also referred to as solvency ratios/ gearing ratios measures
the company’s ability (in the long term) to sustain its day to day operations.

92

Leverage ratios measure the extent to which the company uses the debt to finance
growth. Remember for the company to sustain its operations, it has to pay its bills
and obligations. Solvency ratios help us understand the company’s long term
sustainability, keeping its obligation in perspective.

The Valuation ratios compare the stock price of the company with either the
profitability of the company or the overall value of company to get a sense of how
cheap or expensive the stock is trading. Thus this ratio helps us in analysing
whether the current share price of the company is perceived as high or low. In
simpler words, the valuation ratio compares the cost of a security with the perks of
owning the stock.

The Operating Ratios, also called the ‘Activity Ratios’ measures the efficiency at
which a business can convert its assets (both current and noncurrent) into
revenues. This ratio helps us understand how efficient the management of the
company is. For this reason, Operating Ratios are sometimes called the
‘Management Ratios’.
Strictly speaking, ratios (irrespective of the category it belongs to) convey a certain
message, usually related to the financial position of the company. For example,
‘Profitability Ratio’ can convey the efficiency of the company, which is usually
measured by computing the ‘Operating Ratio’. Because of such overlaps, it is difficult
to classify these ratios. Hence the ratios are ‘somewhat loosely’ classified.

9.3 – The Profitability Ratios
We will look into the following ratios under ‘The Profitability Ratio’:

93

1. EBITDA Margin (Operating Profit Margin)
o

EBITDA Growth (CAGR)

2. PAT Margin
o

PAT Growth (CAGR)

3. Return on Equity (ROE)
4. Return on Asset (ROA)
5. Return on Capital Employed (ROCE)
EBITDA Margin:
The Earnings before Interest Tax Depreciation & Amortization (EBITDA)
Margin indicates the efficiency of the management. It tells us how efficient the
company’s operating model is. EBITDA Margin tells us how profitable (in percentage
terms) the company is at an operating level. It always makes sense to compare the
EBITDA margin of the company versus its competitor to get a sense of the
management’s efficiency in terms of managing their expense.
In order to calculate the EBITDA Margin, we first need to calculate the EBITDA itself.
EBITDA = [Operating Revenues – Operating Expense]
Operating Revenues = [Total Revenue – Other Income]
Operating Expense = [Total Expense – Finance Cost – Depreciation & Amortization]
EBIDTA Margin = EBITDA / [Total Revenue – Other Income]
Continuing the example of Amara Raja Batteries Limited, the EBITDA Margin
calculation for the FY14 is as follows:
We first calculate EBITDA , which is computed as follows:
[Total Revenue – Other Income] – [Total Expense – Finance Cost – Depreciation &
Amortization]
Note: Other income is income by virtue of investments and other non operational
activity. Including other income in EBITDA calculation would clearly skew the data.
For this reason, we have to exclude Other Income from Total Revenues.
[3482 – 46] – [2942 – 0.7 – 65]
= [3436] – [2876]
= 560 Crores
Hence the EBITDA Margin is:
560 / 3436

94

= 16.3%
I have two questions for you at this stage:
1. What does an EBITDA of Rs.560 Crs and an EBITDA margin of 16.3% indicate?
2. How good or bad an EBITDA margin of 16.3% is?
The first question is a fairly simple. An EBITDA of Rs.560 Crs means that the
company has retained Rs.560 Crs from its operating revenue of Rs.3436 Crs. This
also means out of Rs.3436 Crs the company spent Rs.2876 Crs towards its expenses.
In percentage terms, the company spent 83.7% of its revenue towards its expenses
and retained 16.3% of the revenue at the operating level, for its operations.
Now for the 2nd question, hopefully you should not have an answer.
Remember we did discuss this point earlier in this chapter. A financial ratio on its
own conveys very little information. To make sense of it, we should either see the
trend or compare it with its peers. Going with this, a 16.3% EBITDA margin conveys
very little information.
To makes some sense of the EBITDA margin, let us look at Amara Raja’s EBITDA
margin trend for the last 4 years, (all numbers in Rs Crs, except EBITDA margin):

Year

Operating Revenues

Operating Expense

EBITDA

EBITDA Margin

2011

1761

1504

257

14.6%

2012

2364

2025

340

14.4%

2013

2959

2508

451

15.2%

2014

3437

2876

560

16.3%

It appears that ARBL has maintained its EBITDA at an average of 15%, and in fact on
a closer look it is clear the EBITDA margin is increasing. This is a good sign as it
shows consistency and efficiency in the management’s operational capabilities.
In 2011 the EBITDA was Rs.257 Crs and in 2014 the EBITDA is Rs.560Crs. This
translates to a 4 year EBITDA CAGR growth of 21%.
Please note, we have discussed the formula for CAGR in module 1.

95

Clearly, it appears that both EBITDA margin and EBITDA growth are quite
impressive. However we still do not know if it is the best. In order to find out if it is
the best one needs to compare these numbers with its competitors. In case of ARBL
it would be Exide batteries Limited. I would encourage you to do the same for Exide
and compare the results.
PAT Margin:
While the EBITDA margin is calculated at the operating level, the Profit After Tax
(PAT) margin is calculated at the final profitability level. At the operating level we
consider only the operating expenses however there are other expenses such as
depreciation and finance costs which are not considered. Along with these expenses
there are tax expenses as well. When we calculate the PAT margin, all expenses are
deducted from the Total Revenues of the company to identify the overall
profitability of the company.
PAT Margin = [PAT/Total Revenues]
PAT is explicitly stated in the Annual Report. ARBL’s PAT for the FY14 is Rs.367 Crs on
the overall revenue of Rs.3482 Crs (including other income). This translates to a PAT
margin of:
= 367 / 3482
=10.5 %
Here is the PAT and PAT margin trend for ARBL:

Year

PAT (in INR Crs)

PAT Margin

2011

148

8.4%

2012

215

8.9%

2013

287

9.6%

2014

367

10.5%

The PAT and PAT margin trend seems impressive as we can clearly see a margin
expansion. The 4 year CAGR growth stands at 25.48%, which is again good. Needless
to say, it always makes sense to compare ratios with its competitors.

96

Return on Equity (RoE):
The Return on Equity (RoE) is a very important ratio, as it helps the investor assess
the return the shareholder earns for every unit of capital invested. RoE measures
the entity’s ability to generate profits from the shareholders investments. In other
words, RoE shows the efficiency of the company in terms of generating profits to its
shareholders. Obviously, higher the RoE, the better it is for the shareholders. In fact
this is one of the key ratios that helps the investor identify investable attributes of
the company. To give you a perspective, the average RoE of top Indian companies
vary between 14 – 16%. I personally prefer to invest in companies that have a RoE of
18% upwards.
This ratio is compared with the other companies in the same industry and is also
observed over time.
Also note, if the RoE is high, it means a good amount of cash is being generated by
the company, hence the need for external funds is less. Thus a higher ROE indicates
a higher level of management performance.
RoE can be calculated as: [Net Profit / Shareholders Equity* 100]
There is no doubt that RoE is an important ratio to calculate, but like any other
financial ratios it also has a few drawbacks. To help you understand its drawbacks,
consider this hypothetical example.
Assume Vishal runs a Pizza store. To bake pizza’s Vishal needs an oven which costs
him Rs.10,000/-. Oven is an asset to Vishal’s business. He procures the oven from his
own funds and seeks no external debt. At this stage you would agree on his balance
sheet he has a shareholder equity of Rs.10,000 and an asset equivalent to Rs.10,000.
Now, assume in his first year of operation, Vishal generates a profit of Rs.2500/-.
What is his RoE? This is quite simple to compute:
RoE = 2500/10000*100
=25.0%.
Now let us twist the story a bit. Vishal has only Rs.8000/- he borrows Rs.2000 from
his father to purchase an oven worth Rs.10000/-. How do you think his balance
sheet would look?
On the liability side he would have:
Shareholder Equity = Rs.8000
Debt = Rs.2000

97

This makes Vishal’s total liability Rs. 10,000. Balancing this on the asset side, he has
an asset worth Rs.10,000. Let us see how his RoE looks now:
RoE = 2500 / 8000*100
= 31.25%
With an additional debt, the RoE shot up quite significantly. Now, what if Vishal had
only Rs.5000 and borrowed the additional Rs.5000 from his father to buy the oven.
His balance sheet would look like this:
On the liability side he would have:
Shareholder Equity = Rs.5000
Debt = Rs.5000
Vishal’s total liability is Rs. 10,000. Balancing this on the asset side, he has an asset
worth Rs.10,000. Let us see how his RoE looks now:
RoE = 2500 / 5000 *100
=50.0%
Clearly, higher the debt Vishal seeks to finance his asset, (which in turn is required
to generate profits) higher is the RoE. A high RoE is great, but certainly not at the
cost of high debt. The problem is with a high amount of debt, running the business
gets very risky as the finance cost increases drastically. For this reason inspecting
the RoE closely becomes extremely important. One way to do this is by
implementing a technique called the ‘DuPont Model’ also called DuPont Identity.
This model was developed in 1920’s by the DuPont Corporation. DuPont Model
breaks up the RoE formula into three components with each part representing a
certain aspect of business. The DuPont analysis uses both the P&L statement and
the Balance sheet for the computation.
The RoE as per DuPont model can be calculated as:

If you notice the above formula, the denominator and the numerator cancels out
with one another eventually leaving us with the original RoE formula which is:
RoE = Net Profit / Shareholder Equity *100
However in the process of decomposing the RoE formula, we gained insights into
three distinct aspects of the business. Let us look into the three components of the
DuPont model that makes up the RoE formula :

98

o

Net Profit Margin = Net Profits/ Net Sales*100
This is the first part of the DuPont Model and it expresses the company’s ability to
generate profits. This is nothing but the PAT margin we looked at earlier in this
chapter. A low Net profit margin would indicate higher costs and increased
competition.

o

Asset Turnover = Net Sales / Average Total asset
Asset turnover ratio is an efficiency ratio that indicates how efficiently the company
is using its assets to generate revenue. Higher the ratio, it means the company is
using its assets more efficiently. Lower the ratio, it could indicate management or
production problems. The resulting figure is expressed as number of times per year.

o

Financial Leverage = Average Total Assets / Shareholders Equity
Financial leverage helps us answer this question – ‘For every unit of shareholders
equity, how many units of assets does the company have’. For example if the
financial leverage is 4, this means for every Rs.1 of equity, the company supports
Rs.4 worth of assets. Higher the financial leverage along with increased amounts of
debt, will indicate the company is highly leveraged and hence the investor should
exercise caution. The resulting figure is expressed as number of times per year.
As you can see, the DuPont model breaks up the RoE formula into three distinct
components, with each component giving an insight into the company’s operating
and financial capabilities.
Let us now proceed to implement the DuPont Model to calculate Amara Raja’s RoE
for the FY 14. For this we need to calculate the values of the individual components.
Net Profit Margin: As I mentioned earlier, this is same as the PAT margin. From our
calculation earlier, we know the Net Profit Margin for ARBL is 9.2%
Asset Turnover = Net Sales / Average Total assets
We know from the FY14 Annual Report, Net sales of ARBL stands at Rs.3437 Crs.
The denominator has Average Total Assets which we know can be sourced from the
Balance Sheet. But what does the word ‘Average’ indicate?
From ARBL’s balance sheet, the total asset for FY14 is Rs.2139Crs. But think about
this, the reported number is for the Financial Year 2014, which starts from 1st of
April 2013 and close on 31st March 2014. This implies that at the start of the financial
year 2014 (1st April 2013), the company must have commenced its operation with
assets that it carried forward from the previous financial year (FY 2013). During the
financial year (FY 2014) the company has acquired some more assets which when
added to the previous year’s (FY2013) assets totaled to Rs.2139 Crs. Clearly the
company started the financial year with a certain rupee value of assets but closed
the year with a totally different rupee value of assets.

99

Keeping this in perspective, if I were to calculate the asset turnover ratio, which
asset value should I consider for the denominator? Should I consider the asset value
at the beginning of the year or at the asset value at the end of the year? To avoid
confusion, the practice is to take average of the asset values for the two financial
years.
Do remember this technique of averaging line items, as we will be using this across
other ratios as well.
From ARBL’s annual report we know:
Net Sales in FY14 is Rs.3437Crs
Total Assets in FY13 is Rs.1770 Crs
Total Assets in FY14 is Rs.2139 Crs
Average Assets = (1770 + 2139) / 2
= 1955
Asset Turnover = 3437 / 1955
= 1.75 times
This means for every Rs.1 of asset deployed, the company is generating Rs.1.75 in
revenues.
We will now calculate the last component that is the Financial Leverage.
Financial Leverage = Average Total Assets / Average Shareholders Equity
We know the average total assets is Rs.1955. We just need to look into the
shareholders equity. For reasons similar to taking the “Average Assets” as opposed
to just the current year assets, we will consider “Average Shareholder equity” as
opposed to just the current year’s shareholder equity.
Shareholders Equity for FY13 = Rs.1059 Crs
Shareholders Equity for FY14 = Rs.1362 Crs
Average shareholder equity = Rs.1211 Crs
Financial Leverage = 1955 / 1211
= 1.61 times

100

Considering ARBL has little debt, Financial Leverage of 1.61 is indeed an
encouraging number. The number above indicates that for every Rs.1 of Equity,
ARBL supports Rs.1.61 of assets.
We now have all the inputs to calculate RoE for ARBL, we will now proceed to do the
same:
RoE = Net Profit Margin X Asset Turnover X Financial Leverage
= 9.2% * 1.75 * 1.61
~ 25.9%. Quite impressive I must say!
I understand this is a lengthy way to calculate RoE, but this is perhaps the best way
as in the process of calculating RoE, we can develop valuable insights into the
business. DuPont model not only answers what the return is but also the quality of
the return.
However if you wish do a quick RoE calculation you can do so the following way:
RoE = Net Profits / Avg shareholders Equity
From the annual report we know for the FY14 the PAT is Rs.367 Crs
RoE = 367 / 1211
= 30.31%
Return on Asset (RoA):
Having understood the DuPont Model, understanding the next two ratios should be
simple. Return on Assets (RoA) evaluates the effectiveness of the entity’s ability to
use the assets to create profits. A well managed entity limits investments in non
productive assets. Hence RoA indicates the management’s efficiency at deploying its
assets. Needless to say, higher the RoA, the better it is.
RoA = [Net income + interest*(1-tax rate)] / Total Average Assets
From the Annual Report, we know:
Net income for FY 14 = Rs.367.4 Crs
And we know from the Dupont Model the Total average assets (for FY13 and FY14) =
Rs.1955 Crs
So what does interest *(1- tax rate) mean? Well, think about it, the loan taken by
the company is also used to finance the assets which in turn is used to
generate profits. So in a sense, the debtholders (entities who have given loan to the
company) are also a part of the company. From this perspective the interest paid

101

out also belongs to a stakeholder of the company. Also, the company benefits in
terms of paying lesser taxes when interest is paid out, this is called a ‘tax shield’. For
these reasons, we need to add interest (by accounting for the tax shield) while
calculating the ROA.
The Interest amount (finance cost) is Rs.7 Crs, accounting for the tax shield it would
be
= 7* (1 – 32%)
= 4.76 Crs . Please note, 32% is the average tax rate.
Hence ROA would be –
RoA = [367.4 + 4.76] / 1955
~ 372.16 / 1955
~19.03%
Return on Capital Employed (ROCE):
The Return on Capital employed indicates the profitability of the company taking
into consideration the overall capital it employs.
Overall capital includes both equity and debt (both long term and short term).
ROCE = [Profit before Interest & Taxes / Overall Capital Employed]
Overall Capital Employed = Short term Debt + Long term Debt + Equity
From ARBL’s Annual Report we know:
Profit before Interest & Taxes = Rs.537.7 Crs
Overall Capital Employed:
Short term debt: Rs.8.3 Crs
Long term borrowing: Rs.75.9 Crs
Shareholders equity = Rs.1362 Crs
Overall capital employed: 8.3 + 75.9 + 1362 = 1446.2 Crs
ROCE = 537.7 / 1446.2
= 37.18%

102

Key takeaways from this chapter:
1. A Financial ratio is a useful financial metric of a company. On its own merit the ratio
conveys very little information
2. It is best to study the ratio’s recent trend or compare it with the company’s peers to
develop an opinion
3. Financial ratios can be categorized into ‘Profitability’, ‘Leverage’, ‘Valuation’, and
‘Operating’ ratios. Each of these categories give the analyst a certain view on the
company’s business
4. EBITDA is the amount of money the company makes after subtracting the
operational expenses of the company from its operating revenue
5. EBITDA margin indicates the percentage profitability of the company at the
operating level
6. PAT margin gives the overall profitability of the firm
7. Return on Equity (ROE) is a very valuable ratio. It indicates how much return the
shareholders are making over their initial investment in the company
8. A high ROE and a high debt is not a great sign
9. DuPont Model helps in decomposing the ROE into different parts, with each part
throwing light on different aspects of the business
10. DuPont method is probably the best way to calculate the ROE of a firm
11. Return on Assets in an indicator of how efficiently the company is utilizing its assets
12. Return on Capital employed indicates the overall return the company generates
considering both the equity and debt.
13. For the ratios to be useful, it should be analyzed in comparison with other
companies in the same industry.
14. Also, ratios should be analyzed both at a single point in time and as an indicator of
broader trends over time

103

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 10

The Financial Ratio Analysis (Part 2)
99

10.1 – The Leverage Ratios
We touched upon the topic of financial leverage while discussing Return on Equity
and the DuPont analysis. The use of leverage (debt) is like a double edged sword.
Well managed companies seek debt if they foresee a situation where, they can
deploy the debt funds in an environment which generates a higher return in
contrast to the interest payments the company has to makes to service its debt. Do
recollect a judicious use of debt to finance assets also increases the return on
equity.
However if a company takes on too much debt, then the interest paid to service the
debt eats into the profit share of the shareholders. Hence there is a very thin line
that separates the good and the bad debt. Leverage ratios mainly deal with the
overall extent of the company’s debt, and help us understand the company’s
financial leverage better.
We will be looking into the following leverage ratios:
1. Interest Coverage Ratio
2. Debt to Equity Ratio

104

3. Debt to Asset Ratio
4. Financial Leverage Ratio
So far we have been using Amara Raja Batteries Limited (ARBL) as an example,
however to understand leverage ratios, we will look into a company that has a
sizable debt on its balance sheet. I have chosen Jain Irrigation Systems Limited (JISL),
I would encourage you calculate the ratios for a company of your choice.
Interest Coverage Ratio:
The interest coverage ratio is also referred to as debt service ratio or the debt
service coverage ratio. The interest coverage ratio helps us understand how much
the company is earning relative to the interest burden of the company. This ratio
helps us interpret how easily a company can pay its interest payments. For example,
if the company has an interest burden of Rs.100 versus an income of Rs.400, then
we clearly know that the company has sufficient funds to service its debt. However a
low interest coverage ratio could mean a higher debt burden and a greater
possibility of bankruptcy or default.
The formula to calculate the interest coverage ratio:
[Earnings before Interest and Tax / Interest Payment]
The ‘Earnings before Interest and Tax’ (EBIT) is:
EBITDA – Depreciation & Amortization
Let us apply this ratio on Jain Irrigation Limited. Here is the snapshot of Jain
Irrigation’s P&L statement for the FY 14, I have highlighted the Finance costs in red:

105

We know EBITDA = [Revenue – Expenses]
To calculate the expenses, we exclude the Finance cost (Rs.467.64Crs) and
Depreciation & Amortization cost (Rs.204.54) from the total expenses of Rs.5730.34
Crs.
Therefore EBITDA = Rs.5828.13 – 5058.15 Crs
EBITDA = Rs. 769.98 Crs
We know EBIT = EBITDA – [Depreciation & Amortization]
= Rs.769.98 – 204.54
= Rs. 565.44
We know Finance Cost = Rs.467.64,
Hence Interest coverage is:
= 565.44/ 467.64
= 1.209x
The ‘x’ in the above number represents a multiple. Hence 1.209x should be read as
1.209 ‘times’.

106

Interest coverage ratio of 1.209x suggests that for every Rupee of interest payment
due, Jain Irrigation Limited is generating an EBIT of 1.209 times.
Debt to Equity Ratio:
This is a fairly straightforward ratio. Both the variables required for this
computation can be found in the Balance Sheet. It measures the amount of the total
debt capital with respect to the total equity capital. A value of 1 on this ratio
indicates an equal amount of debt and equity capital. Higher debt to equity (more
than 1) indicates higher leverage and hence one needs to be careful. Lower than 1
indicates a relatively bigger equity base with respect to the debt.
The formula to calculate Debt to Equity ratio is:
[Total Debt/Total Equity]
Please note, the total debt here includes both the short term debt and the long term
debt.
Here is JSIL’s Balance Sheet, I have highlighted total equity, long term, and short
term debt:

Total debt = Long term borrowings + Short term borrowings
= 1497.663 + 2188.915
= Rs.3686.578Crs
Total Equity is Rs.2175.549 Crs
Thus, Debt to Equity ratio will be computed as follows:
= 3686.578 / 2175.549
= 1.69

107

Debt to Asset Ratio:
This ratio helps us understand the asset financing pattern of the company. It
conveys to us how much of the total assets are financed through debt capital.
The formula to calculate the same is:
Total Debt / Total Assets
For JSIL, we know the total debt is Rs.3686.578Crs.
From the Balance Sheet, we know the total assets as Rs.8204.447 Crs:

Hence the Debt to Asset ratio is:
=3686.578 / 8204.44
= 0.449 or ~45%.
This means roughly about 45% of the assets held by JSIL is financed through debt
capital or creditors (and therefore 55% is financed by the owners). Needless to say,
higher the percentage the more concerned the investor would be as it indicates
higher leverage and risk.
Financial Leverage Ratio
We briefly looked at the financial leverage ratio in the previous chapter, when we
discussed about Return on Equity. The financial leverage ratio gives us an indication,
to what extent the assets are supported by equity.
The formula to calculate the Financial Leverage Ratio is:
Average Total Asset / Average Total Equity
From JSIL’s FY14 balance sheet, I know the average total assets is Rs.8012.615.The
average total equity is Rs.2171.755. Hence the financial leverage ratio or simply the
leverage ratio is:
8012.615 / 2171.755
= 3.68

108

This means JSIL supports Rs.3.68 units of assets for every unit of equity. Do
remember higher the number, higher is the company’s leverage and the more
careful the investor needs to be.

10.2 – Operating Ratios
Operating Ratios also called ‘Activity ratios’ or the ‘Management ratios’ indicate the
efficiency of the company’s operational activity. To some degree, the operating
ratios reveal the management’s efficiency as well. These ratios are called the Asset
Management Ratios, as these ratios indicate the efficiency with which the assets of
the company are utilized.

Some of the popular Operating Ratios are:
1. Fixed Assets Turnover Ratio
2. Working Capital Turnover Ratio
3. Total Assets Turnover Ratio
4. Inventory Turnover Ratio
5. Inventory Number of Days
6. Receivable Turnover Ratio
7. Days Sales Outstanding (DSO)
The above ratios combine data from both the P&L statement and Balance sheet. We
will understand these ratios by calculating them for Amara Raja Batteries Limited.
To get a true sense of how good or bad the operating ratios of a company are, one
must compare the ratios with the company’s peers /competitors or these ratios
should be compared over the years for the same company.

109

Fixed Assets Turnover
The ratio measures the extent of the revenue generated in comparison to its
investment in fixed assets. It tells us how effectively the company uses its plant and
equipment. Fixed assets include the property, plant and equipment. Higher the
ratio, it means the company is effectively and efficiently managing its fixed assets.
Fixed Assets Turnover = Operating Revenues / Total Average Asset
The assets considered while calculating the fixed assets turnover should be net of
accumulated depreciation, which is nothing but the net block of the company. It
should also include the capital work in progress. Also, we take the average assets for
reasons discussed in the previous chapter.
From ARBL’s FY14 Balance Sheet:

= (767.864 + 461.847)/2
= Rs.614.855 Crs
We know the operating revenue for FY14 is Rs.3436.7 Crs, hence the Fixed Asset
Turnover ratio is:
= 3436.7 / 614.85
=5.59
While evaluating this ratio, do keep in mind the stage the company is in. For a very
well established company, the company may not be utilizing its cash to invest in
fixed assets. However for a growing company, the company may invest in fixed
assets and hence the fixed assets value may increase year on year. You can notice
this in case of ARBL as well, for the FY13 the Fixed assets value is at Rs.461.8 Crs and
for the FY14 the fixed asset value is at Rs.767.8 Crs.
This ratio is mostly used by capital intensive industries to analyze how effectively the
fixed assets of the company are used.
Working Capital Turnover
Working capital refers to the capital required by the firm to run its day to day
operations. To run the day to day operations, the company needs certain type of
assets. Typically such assets are – inventories, receivables, cash etc. If you realize
these are current assets. A well managed company finances the current assets by
current liabilities. The difference between the current assets and current liabilities
gives us the working capital of the company.

110

Working Capital = Current Assets – Current Liabilities
If the working capital is a positive number, it implies that the company has working
capital surplus and can easily manage its day to day operations. However if the
working capital is negative, it means the company has a working capital deficit.
Usually if the company has a working capital deficit, they seek a working capital loan
from their bankers.
The concept of ‘Working Capital Management’ in itself is a huge topic in Corporate
Finance. It includes inventory management, cash management, debtor’s
management etc. The company’s CFO (Chief Financial Officer) strives to manage the
company’s working capital efficiently. Of course, we will not get into this topic as we
will digress from our main topic.
The working capital turnover ratio is also referred to as Net sales to working capital.
The working capital turnover indicates how much revenue the company generates
for every unit of working capital. Suppose the ratio is 4, then it indicates that the
company generates Rs.4 in revenue for every Rs.1 of working capital. Needless to
say, higher the number, better it is. Also, do remember all ratios should be
compared with its peers/competitors in the same industry and with the company’s
past and planned ratio to get a deeper insight of its performance.
The formula to calculate the Working Capital Turnover:
Working Capital Turnover = [Revenue / Average Working Capital]
Let us implement the same for Amara Raja Batteries Limited. To begin with, we
need to calculate the working capital for the FY13 and the FY14 and then find out
the average. Here is the snapshot of ARBL’s Balance sheet, I have highlighted the
current assets (red) and current liabilities (green) for both the years:

111

The average working capital for the two financial years can be calculated as follows:

Current Assets for the FY13

Rs.1256.85

Current Liabilities for the FY13

Rs.576.19

Working Capital for the FY13

Rs.680.66

Current Asset for the FY14

Rs.1298.61

Current Liability for the FY14

Rs.633.70

Working Capital for the FY14

Rs.664.91

Average Working Capital

Rs.672.78

We know the revenue from operations for ARBL is Rs.3437 Crs. Hence the working
capital turnover ratio is:
= 3437 / 672.78
= 5.11 times
The number indicates that for every Rs.1 of working capital, the company is
generating Rs.5.11 in terms of revenue. Higher the working capital turnover ratio
the better it is, as it indicates the company is generating better sales in comparison
with the money it uses to fund the sales.
Total Assets Turnover
This is a very straight forward ratio. It indicates the company’s capability to generate
revenues with the given amount of assets. Here the assets include both the fixed
assets as well as current assets. A higher total asset turnover ratio compared to its
historical data and competitor data means the company is using its assets well to
generate more sales.
Total Asset Turnover = Operating Revenue / Average Total Assets
The average total assets for ARBL is as follws –

112

Total Assets for FY 13 – Rs.1770.5 Crs and Total Assets for FY 14 – 2139.4 Crs. Hence
the average assets would be Rs. 1954.95 Crs.
Operating revenue (FY 14) is Rs. 3437 Crs. Hence Total Asset Turnover is:
= 3437 / 1954.95
= 1.75 times
Inventory Turnover Ratio
Inventory refers to the finished goods that a company maintains in its store or
showroom with an expectation of selling the finished goods to prospective clients.
Typically, the company besides keeping the goods in the store would also keep
some additional units of finished goods in its warehouse.
If a company is selling popular products, then the goods in the inventory gets
cleared rapidly, and the company has to replenish the inventory time and again.
This is called the ‘Inventory turnover’.
For example think about a bakery selling hot bread. If the bakery is popular, the
baker probably knows how many pounds of bread he is likely to sell on any given
day. For example, he could sell 200 pounds of bread daily. This means he has to
maintain an inventory of 200 pounds of bread every day. So, in this case the rate of
replenishing the inventory and the inventory turnover is quite high.
This may not be true for every business. For instance, think of a car manufacturer.
Obviously selling cars is not as easy as selling bread. If the manufacturer produces
50 cars, he may have to wait for sometime before he sells these cars. Assume, to
sell 50 cars (his inventory capacity) he will need 3 months. This means, every 3
months he turns over his inventory. Hence in a year he turns over his inventory 4
times.
Finally, if the product is really popular the inventory turnover would be high. This is
exactly what the ‘Inventory Turnover Ratio’ indicates.
The formula to calculate the ratio is:
Inventory Turnover = [Cost of Goods Sold / Average Inventory]
Cost of goods sold is the cost involved in making the finished good. We can find this
in the P&L Statement of the company. Let us implement this for ARBL.
To evaluate the cost of goods sold, I need to look into the expense of the company,
here is the extract of the same:

113

Cost of materials consumed is Rs.2101.19 Crs and purchases of stock-in-trade is
Rs.211.36 Crs. These line items are directly related to the cost of goods sold. Along
with this I would also like to inspect ‘Other Expenses’ to identify any costs that are
related to the cost of goods sold. Here is the extract of Note 24, which details ‘Other
Expenses’.

There are two expenses that are directly related to manufacturing i.e. Stores &
spares consumed which is at Rs.44.94 Crs and the Power & Fuel cost which is at
Rs.92.25Crs.
Hence the Cost of Goods Sold = Cost of materials consumed + Purchase of stock in
trade + Stores & spares consumed + Power & Fuel
= 2101.19 + 211.36 + 44.94 + 92.25
COGS= Rs.2449.74 Crs
This takes care of the numerator. For the denominator, we just take the average
inventory for the FY13 and FY14. From the balance sheet – Inventory for the FY13 is
Rs.292.85 Crs and for the FY14 is Rs.335.00 Crs. The average works out to Rs.313.92
Crs
The Inventory turnover ratio is:
= 2449.74 / 313.92

114

= 7.8 times
~ 8.0 times a year
This means Amara Raja Batteries Limited turns over its inventory 8 times in a year
or once in every 1.5 months. Needless to say, to get a true sense of how good or
bad this number is, one should compare it with its competitor’s numbers.
Inventory Number of days
While the Inventory turnover ratio gives a sense of how many times the
company ‘replenishes’ their inventory, the ‘Inventory number of Days’ gives a sense
of how much time the company takes to convert its inventory into cash. Lesser the
number of days, the better it is. A short inventory number of day’s number implies,
the company’s products are fast moving. The formula to calculate the inventory
number of days is:
Inventory Number of Days = 365 / Inventory Turnover
The inventory number of days is usually calculated on a yearly basis. Hence in the
formula above, 365 indicates the number of days in a year.
Calculating this for ARBL:
= 365 / 7.8
= 46.79 days
~ 47.0 days
This means ARBL roughly takes about 47 days to convert its inventory into cash.
Needless to say, the inventory number of days of a company should be compared
with its competitors, to get a sense of how the company’s products are moving.
Now here is something for you to think about – What would you think about the
following situation?
1. A certain company under consideration has a high inventory turnover ratio
2. Because of a high inventory turnover ratio, the inventory number of days is very low
On the face of it, the inventory management of this company looks good. A high
inventory turnover ratio signifies that the company is replenishing its inventory
quickly, which is excellent. Along with the high inventory turnover, a low inventory
number of days indicate that the company is quickly able to convert its goods into
cash. Again, this is a sign of great inventory management.
However, what if the company has a great product (hence they are able to sell
quickly) but a low production capacity? Even in this case the inventory turnover will
be high and inventory days will be low. But a low production capacity can be a bit
worrisome as it raises many questions about the company’s production:
1. Why is the company not able to increase their production?

115

2. Are they not able to increase production because they are short of funds?
3. If they are short of funds, why can’t they seek a bank loan?
4. Have they approached a bank and are not been able to raise a loan successfully?
5. If they are not able to raise a loan, why?
6. What if the management does not have a great track record, hence the banks
hesitation to give a loan?
7. If funds are not a problem, why can’t the company increase production?
8. Is sourcing raw materials difficult? Is the raw material required regulated by
government (like Coal, power, Oil etc).
9. Difficult access to raw material – does that mean the business is not scalable?
As you can see, if any of the points above is true, then a red flag is raised, hence
investing in the company may not be advisable. To fully understand the production
issues (if any), the fundamental analyst should read through the annual report
(especially the management discussion & analysis report) from the beginning to the
end.
This means whenever you see impressive inventory numbers, always ensure to
double check the production details as well.
Accounts Receivable Turnover Ratio
Having understood the inventory turnover ratio, understanding the receivable
turnover ratio should be quite easy. The receivable turnover ratio indicates how
many times in a given period the company receives money/cash from its debtors
and customers. Naturally a high number indicates that the company collects cash
more frequently.
The formula to calculate the same is:
Accounts Receivable Turnover Ratio = Revenue / Average Receivables
From the balance sheet we know,
Trade Receivable for the FY13 : Rs.380.67 Crs
Trade Receivable for the FY14 : Rs. 452.78 Crs
Average Receivable for the FY13 : Rs.416.72
Operating Revenue for the FY14 : Rs.3437 Crs
Hence the Receivable Turnover Ratio is:
= 3437 / 416.72
= 8.24 times a year
~ 8.0 times
This means ARBL receives cash from its customers roughly about 8.24 times a year
or once every month and a half.

116

Days Sales Outstanding (DSO) )/ Average Collection Period/ Day Sales in
Receivables
The days sales outstanding ratio illustrates the average cash collection period i.e the
time lag between billing and collection. This calculation shows the efficiency of the
company’s collection department. Quicker/faster the cash is collected from the
creditors, faster the cash can be used for other activities. The formula to calculate
the same is:
Days Sales outstanding = 365 / Receivable Turnover Ratio
Solving this for ARBL,
= 365 / 8.24
= 44.29 days
This means ARBL takes about 45 days from the time it raises an invoice to the time it
can collect its money against the invoice.
Both Receivables Turnover and the DSO indicate the credit policy of the firm. A
efficiently run company, should strike the right balance between the credit policy
and the credit it extends to its customers.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. Leverage ratios include Interest Coverage, Debt to Equity, Debt to Assets and the
Financial Leverage ratios
2. The Leverage ratios mainly study the company’s debt with respect to the company’s
ability to service the long term debt
3. Interest coverage ratio inspects the company’s earnings ability (at the EBIT level) as
a multiple of its finance costs
4. Debt to equity ratio measures the amount of equity capital with respect to the debt
capital. Debt to equity of 1 implies equal amount of debt and equity
5. Debt to Asset ratio helps us understand the asset financing structure of the
company (especially with respect to the debt)
6. The Financial Leverage ratio helps us understand the extent to which the assets are
financed by the owner’s equity
7. The Operating Ratios also referred to as the Activity ratios include – Fixed Assets
Turnover, Working Capital turnover, Total Assets turnover, Inventory turnover,
Inventory number of days, Receivable turnover and Day Sales Outstanding ratios
8. The Fixed asset turnover ratio measures the extent of the revenue generated in
comparison to its investment in fixed assets

117

9. Working capital turnover ratio indicates how much revenue the company generates
for every unit of working capital
10. Total assets turnover indicates the company’s ability to generate revenues with the
given amount of assets
11. Inventory turnover ratio indicates how many times the company replenishes its
inventory during the year
12. Inventory number of days represents the number of days the company takes to
convert its inventory to cash
1. A high inventory turnover and therefore a low inventory number of days is a great combination
2. However make sure this does not come at the cost of low production capacity

13. The Receivable turnover ratio indicates how many times in a given period the
company receives money from its debtors and customers
14. The Days sales outstanding (DSO) ratio indicates the Average cash collection period
i.e the time lag between the Billing and Collection

118

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 11

The Financial Ratio Analysis (Part 3)
69

11.1 – The Valuation Ratio
Valuation in general, is the estimate of the ‘worth’ of something. In the context of
investments, ‘something’ refers to the price of a stock. When making an investment
decision, irrespective of how attractive the business appears, what matters finally is
the valuation of the business. Valuations dictate the price you pay to acquire a
business. Sometimes, a mediocre business at a ridiculously cheap valuation may be
a great investment option as opposed to an exciting business with an extremely
high valuation.
The valuation ratios help us develop a sense on how the stock price is valued by the
market participants. These ratios help us understand the attractiveness of the stock
price from an investment perspective. The point of valuation ratios is to compare
the price of a stock viz a viz the benefits of owning it. Like all the other ratios we had
looked at, the valuation ratios of a company should be evaluated alongside the
company’s competitors.

Valuation ratios are usually computed as a ratio of the company’s share price to an
aspect of its financial performance. We will be looking at the following three
important valuation ratios:
1. Price to Sales (P/S) Ratio
2. Price to Book Value (P/BV) Ratio and

119

3. Price to Earnings (P/E) Ratio
Continuing with the Amara Raja Batteries Limited (ARBL) example, let us implement
these ratios to see how ARBL fares. The stock price of ARBL is a vital input used to
calculate the valuation ratios. As I write this chapter on 28th of Oct 2014, ARBL is
trading at Rs.661 per share.
We also need the total number of shares outstanding in ARBL to calculate the above
ratios. If you recollect, we have calculated the same in chapter 6. The total number
of shares outstanding is 17,08,12,500 or 17.081Crs
Price to Sales (P/S) Ratio
In many cases, investors may use sales instead of earnings to value their
investments. The earnings figure may not be true as some companies might be
experiencing a cyclical low in their earning cycle. Additionally due to some
accounting rules, a profitable company may seem to have no earnings at all, due to
the huge write offs applicable to that industry. So, investors would prefer to use this
ratio. This ratio compares the stock price of the company with the company’s sales
per share. The formula to calculate the P/S ratio is:
Price to sales ratio = Current Share Price / Sales per Share
Let us calculate the same for ARBL. We will take up the denominator first:
Sales per share = Total Revenues / Total number of shares
We know from ARBL’s P&L statement the:
Total Revenue = Rs.3482 Crs
Number of Shares = 17.081 Crs
Sales per share = 3482 / 17.081
Therefore the Sales per share = Rs. 203.86
This means for every share outstanding, ARBL does Rs.203.86 worth of sales.
Price to Sales Ratio = 661 / 203.86
= 3.24x or 3.24 times
A P/S ratio of 3.24 times indicates that, for every Rs.1 of sales, the stock is valued
Rs.3.24 times higher. Obviously, higher the P/S ratio, higher is the valuation of the
firm. One has to compare the P/S ratio with its competitors in the industry to get a
fair sense of how expensive or cheap the stock is.

120

Here is something that you need to remember while calculating the P/S ratio.
Assume there are two companies (Company A and Company B) selling the same
product. Both the companies generate a revenue of Rs.1000/-each. However,
Company A retains Rs.250 as PAT and Company B retains Rs.150 as PAT. In this
case, Company A has a profit margin of 25% versus Company B’s which has a 15%
profit margin. Hence the sales of Company A is more valuable than the sales of
Company B. Hence if Company A is trading at a higher P/S, then the valuation
maybe justified, simply because every rupee of sales Company A generates, a higher
profit is retained.
Hence whenever you feel a particular company is trading at a higher valuation from
the P/S ratio perspective, do remember to check the profit margin for cues.
Price to Book Value (P/BV) Ratio
Before we understand the Price to Book Value ratio, we need to understand what
the term ‘Book Value’ means.
Consider a situation where the company has to close down its business and
liquidate all its assets. What is the minimum value the company receives upon
liquidation? The answer to this lies in the “Book Value” of the firm.
The “Book Value” of a firm is simply the amount of money left on table after the
company pays off its obligations. Consider the book value as the salvage value of
the company. Suppose the book value of a company is Rs.200Crs, then this is the
amount of money the company can expect to receive after it sells everything and
settles its debts. Usually the book value is expressed on a per share basis. For
example, if the book value per share is Rs.60, then Rs.60 per share is what the
shareholder can expect in case the company decides to liquidate. The ‘Book Value’
(BV) can be calculated as follows:
BV = [Share Capital + Reserves (excluding revaluation reserves) / Total Number
of shares]
Let us calculate the same for ARBL:
From ARBL’s balance sheet we know:
Share Capital = Rs.17.1 Crs
Reserves = Rs.1345.6 Crs
Revaluation Reserves = 0
Number of shares: 17.081
Hence the Book Value per share = [17.1+1345.6 – 0] / 17.081

121

= Rs.79.8 per share
This means if ARBL were to liquidate all its assets and pay off its debt, Rs.79.8 per
shares is what the shareholders can expect.
Moving ahead, if we divide the current market price of the stock by the book value
per share, we will get the price to the book value of the firm. The P/BV indicates how
many times the stock is trading over and above the book value of the firm. Clearly
the higher the ratio, the more expensive the stock is.
Let us calculate this for ARBL. We know:
Stock price of ARBL = Rs.661 per share
BV of ARBL = 79.8 per share
P/BV = 661/79.8
= 8.3x or 8.3 times
This means ARBL is trading over 8.3 times its book value.
A high ratio could indicate the firm is overvalued relative to the equity/ book value
of the company. A low ratio could indicate the company is undervalued relative to
the equity/ book value of the company.
Price to Earning (P/E) Ratio
The Price to Earnings ratio is perhaps the most popular financial ratio. Everybody
likes to check the P/E of a stock. Because of the popularity the P/E ratio enjoys, it is
often considered the ‘financial ratio superstar’.
The P/E of a stock is calculated by dividing the current stock price by the Earning
Per share (EPS). Before we proceed further to understand the PE ratio, let us
understand what “Earnings per Share” (EPS) stands for.
EPS measures the profitability of a company on a per share basis. For example
assume a certain company with 1000 shares outstanding generates a profit of
Rs.200000/-. Then the earnings on a per share basis would be:
=200000 / 1000
= Rs.200 per share.
Hence the EPS gives us a sense of the profits generated on a per share basis.
Clearly, higher the EPS, better it is for its shareholders.
If you divide the current market price with EPS we get the Price to Earnings ratio of a
firm. The P/E ratio measures the willingness of the market participants to pay for

122

the stock, for every rupee of profit that the company generates. For example if the
P/E of a certain firm is 15, then it simply means that for every unit of profit the
company earns, the market participants are willing to pay 15 times. Higher the P/E,
more expensive is the stock.
Let us calculate the P/E for ARBL. We know from its annual report –
PAT = Rs.367Crs
Total Number of Shares = 17.081 Crs
EPS = PAT / Total Number of shares
= 367 / 17.081
= Rs.21.49
Current Market Price of ARBL = 661
Hence P/E = 661 / 21.49
= 30.76 times
This means for every unit of profit generated by ARBL, the market participants are
willing to pay Rs.30.76 to acquire the share.
Now assume, ARBL’s price jumps to Rs.750 while the EPS remains at Rs.21.49, the
new P/E would be:
= 750/21.49
= 34.9 times
While the EPS stayed flat at Rs.21.49 per share, the stock’s P/E jumped. Why do you
think this happened?
Clearly, the P/E Ratio jumped because of the increase in the stock price. As we know
the stock price of a company increases when the expectations from the company
increases.
Remember, P/E Ratio is calculated with ‘earnings’ in its denominator. While looking
at the P/E ratio, do remember the following key points:
1. P/E indicates how expensive or cheap the stock is trading at. Never buy stocks that
are trading at high valuations. I personally do not like to buy stocks that are trading
beyond 25 or at the most 30 times its earnings, irrespective of the company and the
sector it belongs to
2. The denominator in P/E ratio is the ‘Earnings’, and the earnings can be manipulated

123

3. Make sure the company is not changing its accounting policy too often – this is one
of the ways the company tries to manipulate its earnings.
4. Pay attention to the way depreciation is treated. Provision for lesser depreciation
can boost earnings
5. If the company’s earnings are increasing but not its cash flows and sales, then
clearly something is not right

11.2 – The Index Valuation
Just like a stock, the stock market indices such as the BSE Sensex and the CNX Nifty
50 have their valuations which can be measured by the P/E ,P/B and Dividend Yield
ratios. The Index valuation is usually published by the stock exchanges on a daily
basis. The index valuations give us a sense of how cheap or expensive the market is
trading at. To calculate the CNX Nifty 50 P/E ratio, the National Stock Exchange
combines the market capitalization for all the 50 stocks and divides that amount by
the combined earnings for all the 50 stocks. Tracking the Index P/E ratio, gives a
sense of the current state of market as perceived by the market participants. Here is
the historical chart of Nifty 50 P/E ratio* –

* Source – Creytheon

From the P/E chart above, we can make a few important observations –
1. The peak Index valuation was 28x (early 2008), what followed this was a major crash
in the Indian markets
2. The corrections drove the valuation down to almost 11x (late 2008, early 2009). This
was the lowest valuation the Indian market had witnessed in the recent past
3. Usually the Indian Indices P/E ratio ranges between 16x to 20x, with an average of
18x
4. As of today (2014) we are trading around 22x, which is above the average P/E ratio
Based on these observations, the following conclusions can be made –

124

1. One has to be cautious while investing in stocks when the market’s P/E valuations is
above 22x
2. Historically the best time to invest in the markets is when the valuations are around
16x or below.
One can easily find out Index P/E valuation on a daily basis by visiting the National
Stock Exchange (NSE) website.
On NSE’s home page click on Products > Indices > Historical Data > P/E, P/B & Div
> Search
In the search field enter today’s date and you will get the latest P/E valuation of the
market. Do note, the NSE updates this information around 6:00 PM every day.
Here is a snapshot of the search result –

Clearly as of today (13th Nov 2014) the Indian market is trading close to the higher
end of the P/E range; history suggests that we need to be cautious while taking
investment decisions at this level.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. Valuation in general, is the estimate of the ‘worth’ of something
2. Valuation ratios involves inputs from both the P&L statement and the Balance Sheet
3. The Price to Sales ratio compares the stock price of the company with the
company’s sales per share
o

Sales per share is simply the Sales divided by the Number of shares

125

4. Sales of a company with a higher profit margin is more valuable in comparison to
the sales of a company with lower profit margins
5. If a company is going bankrupt, the ‘Book Value’ of a firm is simply the amount of
money left on table after the company pays off its obligations
6. Book value is usually expressed on a per share basis
7. The Price/BV indicates how many times the stock price is trading over and above the
book value of the firm
8. EPS measures the profitability of a company on a per share basis
9. The P/E ratio indicates the willingness of market participants to pay for a stock,
keeping the company’s earnings in perspective
10. One has to be cautious about the earning manipulation while evaluating the P/E
ratio
11. The Indices have a valuation which can be measured by the P/E, P/B or Dividend
Yield ratio
12. It is advisable to exercise caution when the Index is trading at a valuation of 22x or
above
13. A valuation gets attractive when the index is trading at 16x or below
14. The index valuations are published by NSE on their website on a daily basis

126

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 12

The Investment Due Diligence
48

12.1 – Taking stock
Over the last few chapters we understood how to read the financial statements and
calculate a few important financial ratios. These chapters have laid the foundation
to the final objective of this module which is – To use fundamental analysis to
identify the stocks to invest. If you recollect in the earlier chapters, we had discussed
about investable grade attributes. Investable grade attributes simply define the
prerequisites of a company that needs to be validated before making an investment
decision. Think of the investable grade attributes as a checklist based on the
fundamentals of the company. A company that satisfies most of the items in the
checklist, is considered investment worthy.
Now this is where few differences come up. For instance, what I consider as an
investable grade attribute may not be so important to you. For example – I may pay
a lot of attention to corporate governance but another investor may choose not pay
so much attention to corporate governance. He could simply brush it off saying “all
companies have shades of grey, as long as the numbers add up I am fine investing
in the company”.
So the point is, there is no prescribed checklist. Each investor has to build his own
checklist based on his investment experience. However, one has to ensure that each
item on the checklist is qualified based on sound logic. Later in this chapter, I will
share a checklist that I think is reasonably well curated. You could take pointers
from this checklist, if you are starting out fresh. We will keep this checklist as a
guideline and proceed further in this module.

127

12.2 – Generating a stock idea
Now before we proceed further and generate a checklist, we must address a more
basic issue. The process of investing requires us to first select a stock that looks
interesting. After selecting the stock we must subject it to the checklist to figure out
if the stock matches all the checklist criteria, if it does we invest, else we look for
other opportunities.
So in the first place, how do we even select a stock that looks interesting? In other
words, how do we generate a list of stocks that seems interesting enough to
investigate further? Well, there are a few methods to do this –
1. General Observation – This may sound rudimentary, but believe me this is one of
the best ways to develop a stock idea. All you need to do is keep your eyes and ears
open and observe the economic activity around you. Observe what people are
buying and selling, see what products are being consumed, keep an eye on the
neighborhood to see what people are talking about. In fact Peter Lynch, one of the
most illustrious Wall Street investor advocates this method in his book “One up on
Wall Street”. Personally I have used this method to pick some of my investments –
PVR Cinemas Ltd (because I noticed PVR multiplexes mushrooming in the City),
Cummins India Limited (because I noticed most of the buildings had a Cummins
diesel generator in their premises), and Info Edge Limited (Info Edge owns
naukri.com, which is probably the most preferred job portal).
2. Stock screener – A stock screener helps to screen for stocks based on the
parameters you define and therefore helps investors perform quality stock analysis
.For example you can use a stock screener to identify stocks that have a ROE of 25%
along with PAT margins of 20%. A stock screener is very helpful tool when you want
to shortlist a handful of investment ideas from a big basket of stocks. There are

128

many stock screeners available; I personally like the Google finance’s stock screener
and screener.in.
3. Macro Trends – Keeping a general tab on the macroeconomic trend is a great way
of identifying good stocks. Here is an illustration of the same – As of today there is a
great push for infrastructure projects in India. An obvious beneficiary of this push
would be the cement companies operating in India. Hence, I would look through all
the cement companies and apply the checklist to identify which amongst all the
cement companies are well positioned to leverage this macro trend.
4. Sectoral Trends – This is sector specific. One needs to track sectors to identify
emerging trends and companies within the sector that can benefit from it. For
example the non alcoholic beverages market is a very traditional sector. Mainly,
three kinds of products are sold and they are coffee, tea, and packaged water.
Hence, most of the companies manufacture and sell just these three products.
However there is a slight shift in the consumer taste these days – the market for
energy drink is opening up and it seems to be promising. Hence the investor may
want to check for companies within the sector that is best positioned to leverage
this change and adapt to it.
5. Special Situation – This is a slightly complicated way of generating a stock idea.
One has to follow companies, company related news, company events etc to
generate an idea based on special situation. One example that I distinctly remember
was that of Cox & Kings. You may know that Cox & Kings is one of the largest and
the oldest tour operator in India. In late 2013, the company announced inclusion of
Mr.Keki Mistry (from HDFC Bank) to its advisory board. Corporate India has an
immense respect for him as he is known to be a very transparent and efficient
business professional. A colleague of mine was convinced that Cox & Kings would
benefit significantly with Mr. Keki Mistry on its board. This alone acted as a primary
trigger for my colleague to investigate the stock further. Upon further research my
colleague happily invested in Cox & Kings Limited. Good for my him, as I write this
today I know he is sitting on a 200% gain
6. Circle of Competence – This is where you leverage your professional skills to
identify stock ideas. This is a highly recommended technique for a newbie investor.
This method requires you to identify stocks within your professional domain. For
example, if you are a medical professional your circle of competence would be the
healthcare industry. You will probably be a better person to understand that
industry than a stock broker or an equity research analyst. All you need to do is
identify which are the listed companies in this space and pick the best based on
your assessment. Likewise if you are banker, you will probably know more about
banks than the others do. So, leverage your circle of competence to pick your
investments.
The point is that the trigger for investigating stocks may come from any source. In
fact, as and when you feel a particular stock looks interesting, just add it to your list.
This list over time will be your ‘watch list’. A very important thing to note here is that
a stock may not satisfy the checklist items at a particular time, however as the time

129

progresses, as business dynamics change at some point it may match up to the
checklist. Hence, it is important to evaluate the stocks in your watch list from time to
time.

12.3 – The Moat
After selecting a stock, one has to run the checklist to investigate the stock further.
This is called the “Investment due diligence”. The due diligence process is very
critical and one has to ensure maximum attention is paid to each and every aspect
of this exercise. I will shortly present a checklist that I think is reasonable. But before
that, we need to talk about ‘The Moat’.
Moat (or economic moat) is a term that was popularized by Warren Buffet. The term
simply refers to the company’s competitive advantage (over its competitors). A
company with a strong moat, ensures the company’s long term profits are
safeguarded. Of course the company should not only have a moat, but it should
also be sustainable over a long period of time. A company which possesses wider
moat characteristics (such as better brand name, pricing power, and better market
share) would be more sustainable, and it would be difficult for the company’s rivals
to eat away its market share.
To understand moats, think of “Eicher Motors Limited”. Eicher Motors is a major
Indian automobile manufacturer. It manufactures commercial vehicles along with
the iconic Royal Enfield bikes. The Royal Enfield bikes enjoy a huge fan following
both in India and outside India. It has a massive brand recall. Royal Enfield caters to
a niche segment which is growing fast. Their bikes are not as expensive as the
Harley Davidson nor are they as inexpensive as probably the TVS bikes. It would be
very hard for any company to enter this space and shake up or rattle the brand
loyalty that Royal Enfield enjoys. In other words, displacing Eicher Motors from this
sweet spot will require massive efforts from its competitors. This is one of Eicher
Motors’ moat.
There are many companies that exhibit such interesting moats. In fact true wealth
creating companies have a sustainable moat as an underlying factor. Think about

130

Infosys – the moat was labor arbitrage between US and India, Page Industries – the
moat was manufacturing and distribution license of Jockey innerwear, Prestige
Industries – the moat was manufacturing and selling pressure cookers, Gruh
Finance Limited – the moat was small ticket size credits disbursed to a certain
market segment…so on an so forth. Hence always invest in companies which have
wider economic moats.

12.4 – The Due Diligence
The equity research due diligence process involves the following stages –
1. Understanding the business – requires reading the annual reports
2. Application of the checklist and
3. Valuation – to estimate the intrinsic value of the business
In stage 1 i.e Understanding the business we dwell deep into the business with a
perspective of knowing the company inside out. We need to make a list of questions
for which we need to find answers to. A good way to start would be by posting a
very basic question about the company – What business is the company involved
in?
To find the answer, we do not go to Google and search, instead look for it in the
company’s latest Annual Report or their website. This helps us understand what the
company has to say about themselves.
When it comes to my own investing practice, I usually like to invest in companies
where the competition is less and there is very little government intervention. For
example, when I decided to invest in PVR Cinemas, there were only 3 listed players
in that space. PVR, INOX, and Cinemax. PVR and Cinemax merged leaving just 2
listed companies in that space. However, there are a few new players who have
entered this space now, hence it is time for me to re evaluate my investment thesis
in PVR.
Once we are comfortable knowing the business, we move to stage 2 i.e application
of the checklist. At this stage we get some performance related answers. Without
much ado, here is the 10 point checklist that I think is good enough for a start –

Sl
No

Variable

Comment

What does it signify

1

Gross Profit
Margin (GPM)

> 20%

Higher the margin, higher is the evidence of a
sustainable moat

131

2

Revenue
Growth

In line with the gross
profit growth

Revenue growth should be in line with the profit
growth

3

EPS

EPS should be
consistent with the Net
Profits

If a company is diluting its equity then it is not good
for its shareholders

4

Debt Level

Company should not be
highly leveraged

High debt means the company is operating on a high
leverage. Plus the finance cost eats away the earnings

5

Inventory

Applicable for
manufacturing
companies

A growing inventory along with a growing PAT margin
is a good sign. Always check the inventory number of
days

6

Sales vs
Receivables

Sales backed by
receivables is not a
great sign

This signifies that the company is just pushing its
products to show revenue growth

7

Cash flow from
operations

Has to be positive

If the company is not generating cash from operations
then it indicates operating stress

8

Return on
Equity

>25%

Higher the ROE, better it is for the investor, however
make sure you check the debt levels along with this

9

Business
Diversity

1 or 2 simple business
lines

Avoid companies that have multiple business
interests. Stick to companies that operate in 1 or 2
segments

10

Subsidiary

Not many

If there are too many subsidiaries then it could be a
sign of the company siphoning off money. Be cautious
while investing in such companies.

Lastly, a company could satisfy each and every point mentioned in the checklist
above, but if the stock is not trading at the right price in the market, then there is no
point buying the stock. So how do we know if the stock is trading at the right price
or not? Well, this is what we do in stage 3. We need to run a valuation exercise on

132

the stock. The most popular valuation method is called the “Discounted Cash Flow
(DCF) Analysis”.
Over the next few chapters, we will discuss the framework to go about formally
researching the company. This is called “Equity Research”. The focus of our
discussion on equity research will largely be on Stage 2 and 3, as I believe stage 1
involves reading up the annual report in a fairly detailed manner.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. A stock idea can come from any source
o

Circle of competence and General observation is a great way to start

2. It is advisable to have a watch list which includes stocks that look interesting
3. Once a stock is identified we should look for sustainable moats
4. The due diligence process involves understanding the business, running the
checklist to understand its financial performance, and the valuation exercise
5. When it comes to understanding the business, one should be completely thorough
with the business operations of the company
6. The checklist should be improvised as and when the investor gains investment
experience
7. The DCF method is one of the best techniques to identify the intrinsic value of the
business

133

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 13

Equity Research (Part 1)
110

13.1 – What to expect?
Having set the context in the previous chapter, we will now proceed to develop a
methodology for conducting a ‘limited resource’ equity research. The reason why I
call it ‘limited resource’ is because you and I as a retail investor have access to just
few resources to conduct equity research. These resources are – internet, company
annual report, and MS Excel. Whilst an Institution has access to human resource
(analyst), access to company management, financial data base (such as Bloomberg,
Reuters, Factset etc), industry reports etc. So my objective here is to demonstrate
how one can understand a company and its business better with the limited
resources at hand. Of course we will do this exercise keeping the end objective in
perspective i.e to make a decision on whether to buy or not to buy a stock.
As mentioned in the previous chapter, we will structure the equity research process
in 3 stages1. Understanding the Business
2. Application of the checklist
3. Intrinsic Value estimation (Valuation) to understand the fair price of the stock
Each stage mentioned above has several steps within it. One must understand that
there is no shortcut to this and one must not compromise any of these steps.

13.2 – Stock Price vs Business Fundamentals
When we take up a company for research, the first step is to understand the
business as much as possible. People often miss this crucial step and go directly
into the stock price analysis. Well, just analyzing the stock price is great if you have a
short term perspective. However for long term investments, understanding the
business is essential.
Why is it important you may wonder? Well, the reason is simple, the more you know
the company the higher is your conviction to stay put with the investment especially
during bad times (aka bear markets). Remember during bear markets, the prices
react and not the business fundamentals. Understanding the company and its
business well gives you the required conviction to reason out why it makes sense to
stay invested in the stock even though the market may think otherwise. They say
bear markets creates value, so if you have a high conviction on the company you
should consider buying into the stock during bear markets and not really selling the

134

stock. Needless to say, this is highly counter intuitive and it takes years of
investment practice to internalize this fact.
Anyway, moving ahead the best source to get information related to the business is
the company’s website and its annual report. We need to study at least the last 5
year annual report to understand how the company is evolving across business
cycles.

13.3 – Understanding the Business
As a first step towards understanding the business, we need to make a list of
questions for which we need to find answers to. Do note, the answers to all these
questions can be found out by reading through the company’s annual report and
website.
Here are a bunch of questions that I think helps us in our quest to understand the
business. I have discussed the rationale behind each question.

Sl
No

Question

Rational behind the question

1

What does the company do?

To get a basic understanding of the business

2

Who are its promoters? What
are their backgrounds?

To know the people behind the business. A sanity check to
eliminate criminal background, intense political affiliation etc

135

What do they manufacture (in
case it is a manufacturing
company)?

To know their products better, helps us get a sense of the
product’s demand supply dynamics

4

How many plants do they have
and where are they located?

To get a sense of their geographic presence. Also at times their
plants could be located in a prime location, and the value of
such location could go off balance sheet, making the company
highly undervalued

5

Are they running the plant in full Gives us an idea on their operational abilities, demand for their
capacity?
products, and their positioning for future demand

6

What kind of raw material is
required?

Helps us understand the dependency of the company. For
example the raw material could be regulated by Govt (like Coal)
or the raw material needs to be imported either of which needs
further investigation

7

Who are the company’s clients
or end users?

By knowing the client base we can get a sense of the sales cycle
and efforts required to sell the company’s products

8

Who are their competitors?

Helps in knowing the competitors. Too many competing
companies means margin pressure. In such a case the company
has to do something innovative. Margins are higher if the
company operates in – monopoly, duopoly, or oligopoly market
structure

9

Besides the promoter and promoter group, it helps to know who
Who are the major shareholders else owns the shares of the company. If a highly successful
of the company?
investor holds the shares in the company then it could be a good
sign

3

Do they plan to launch any new
10
products?

Gives a sense on how ambitious and innovative the company is.
While at the same time a company launching products outside
their domain raises some red flags – is the company losing
focus?

136

11

Do they plan to expand to
different countries?

12

Helps us understand which segment (and therefore the product)
What is the revenue mix? Which
is contributing the most to revenue. This in turns helps us
product sells the most?
understand the drivers for future revenue growth

Same rational as above

Do they operate under a heavy
13
regulatory environment?

This is both good and bad – Good because it acts a natural
barrier from new competition to enter the market, bad because
they are limited with choices when it comes to being innovative
in the industry

Who are their bankers,
auditors?

Good to know, and to rule out the possibility of the companies
association with scandalous agencies

How many employees do they
15 have? Does the company have
labor issues?

Gives us a sense of how labor intensive the company’s
operations are. Also, if the company requires a lot of people with
niche skill set then this could be another red flag

What are the entry barriers for
16 new participants to enter the
industry?

Helps us understand how easy or difficult it is for new companies
to enter the market and eat away the margins

Is the company manufacturing
products that can be easily
17
replicated in a country with
cheap labor?

If yes, the company maybe sitting on a time bomb – think about
companies manufacturing computer hardware, mobile handsets,
garments etc

Does the company have too
many subsidiaries?

If yes, you need to question why? Is it a way for the company to
siphon off funds?

14

18

These questions are thought starters for understanding any company. In the
process of finding answers you will automatically start posting new questions for
which you will have to find answers to. It does not matter which company you are
looking at, if you follow this Q&A framework I’m very confident your understanding
of the company would drastically increase. This is because the Q&A process

137

requires you to read and dig out so much information about the company that you
will start getting a sense of greater understanding of the company.
Remember, this is the first step in the equity research process. If you find red flags
(or something not right about the company) while discovering the answers, I would
advise you to drop researching the company further irrespective of how attractive
the business looks. In case of a red flag, there is no point proceeding to stage 2 of
equity research.
From my experience I can tell you that stage 1 of equity research i.e ‘Understanding
the Company’ takes about 15 hours. After going through this process, I usually try to
summarize my thoughts on a single sheet of paper which would encapsulate all the
important things that I have discovered about the company. This information sheet
has to be crisp and to the point. If I’m unable to achieve this, then it is a clear
indication that I do not know enough about the company. Only after going through
stage 1, I proceed to stage 2 of equity research, which is “Application of Checklist”.
Please do bear in mind the equity research stages are sequential and should follow
the same order.
We will now proceed to stage 2 of equity research. The best way to understand
stage 2 is by actually implementing the checklist on a company.
We have worked with Amara Raja Batteries Limited (ARBL) throughout this module,
hence I guess it makes sense to go ahead and evaluate the checklist on the same
company. Do remember, the company may differ but the equity research
framework remains the same.
As we proceed, a word of caution at this point – the discussion going forward will
mainly revolve around ARBL as we will understand this company better. The idea
here is not to showcase how good or bad ARBL is but instead to illustrate a
framework of what I perceive as a ‘fairly adequate’ equity research process.

13.4 – Application of checklist
The stage 1 of equity research process helps us understand the how, what, who,
and why of the business. It helps us develop a holistic view on the company.
However, like they say – the proof of the pudding is in the eating; so no matter how
attractive the business looks the numbers of the company should also look
attractive.
The objective of the 2nd stage of equity research is to help us comprehend the
numbers and actually evaluate if both the nature of the business and the financial
performance of the business complement each other. If they do not complement
each other then clearly the company will not qualify as investible grade.

138

We looked at the checklist in the previous chapter; I’ll reproduce the same here for
quick reference.

Sl
No

Variable

Comment

What does it signify

1

Net Profit
Growth

In line with the gross
profit growth

Revenue growth should be in line with the profit
growth

2

EPS

EPS should be consistent
with the Net Profits

If a company is diluting its equity then it is not
good for its shareholders

3

Gross Profit
Margin (GPM)

> 20%

Higher the margin, higher is the evidence of a
sustainable moat

Debt Level

Company should not be
highly leveraged

High debt means the company is operating on a
high leverage. Plus the finance cost eats away the
earnings

5

Inventory

Applicable for
manufacturing companies

A growing inventory along with a growing PAT
margin is a good sign. Always check the inventory
number of days

6

Sales vs
Receivables

Sales backed by
receivables is not a great
sign

This signifies that the company is just pushing its
products to show revenue growth

7

Cash flow from
operations

Has to be positive

If the company is not generating cash from
operations then it indicates operating stress

8

Return on Equity

>25%

Higher the ROE, better it is for the investor,
however make sure you check the debt levels
along with this

4

139

Let us go ahead and evaluate each of the checklist items on Amara Raja Batteries
and see what the numbers are suggesting. To begin with we will look into the P&L
items – Gross Profit, Net Profit, and EPS of the company.
Revenue & Pat Growth
The first sign of a company that may qualify as investable grade is the rate at which
it is growing. To evaluate the growth the company, we need to check the revenue
and PAT growth. We will evaluate growth from two perspectives –
1. Year on Year growth – this will gives us a sense of progress the company makes on a
yearly basis. Do note, industries do go through cyclical shifts. From that perspective
if a company has a flat growth, it is ok. However just make sure you check the
competition as well to ensure the growth is flat industry wide.
2. Compounded Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) – The CAGR gives us a sense of how the
company is evolving and growing across business cycles. A good, investable grade
company is usually the first company to overcome the shifts in business cycles. This
will eventually reflect in a healthy CAGR.
Personally I prefer to invest in companies that are growing (Revenue and PAT) over
and above 15% on a CAGR basis.
Let us see how ARBL fares here…

Revenue (INR Crs)

FY 09 -10

FY 10-11

FY 11-12

FY 12 -13

FY 13 – 14

1481

1769

2392

3005

3482

19.4%

35.3%

25.6%

15.9%

148

215

287

367

(11.3%)

45.2%

33.3%

27.8%

Revenue Growth

PAT (INR Crs)

PAT Growth

167

The 5 year CAGR revenue growth is 18.6% and the 5 year CAGR PAT growth is
17.01%. These are an interesting set of numbers; they qualify as a healthy set of
numbers. However, we still need to evaluate the other numbers on the checklist.
Earnings per Share (EPS)

140

The earnings per share represent the profitability on a per share basis. The EPS and
PAT growing at a similar rate indicates that the company is not diluting the earnings
by issuing new shares, which is good for the existing shareholders. One can think of
this as a reflection of the company’s management’s capabilities.

FV Rs.1

FY 09 -10

FY 10-11

FY 11-12

FY 12 -13

FY 13 – 14

EPS (In INR)

19.56

17.34

12.59

16.78

21.51

Share Cap(INR Crs)

17.08

17.08

17.08

17.08

17.08

EPS Growth

–

-11.35%

– 27.39%

33.28%

28.18%

The 5 year EPS CAGR stands at 1.90% for the FY14.
Gross Profit margins
Gross profit margins, expressed as a percentage is calculated as a –
Gross Profits / Net Sales
Where,
Gross Profits = [Net Sales – Cost of Goods Sold]
Cost of goods sold is the cost involved in making the finished good, we had
discussed this calculation while understanding the inventory turnover ratio. Let us
proceed to check how ARBL’s Gross Profit margins has evolved over the years.

In INR Crs, unless indicated

FY 09-10

FY 10-11

FY 11-12

FY 12 -13

FY 13 – 14

Net Sales

1464

1757

2359

2944

3404

COGS

1014

1266

1682

2159

2450

Gross Profits

450

491

677

785

954

141

Gross Profit Margins

30.7%

27.9%

28.7%

26.7%

28.0%

Clearly the Gross Profit Margins (GPM) looks very impressive. The checklist
mandates a minimum GPM of 20%. ARBL has a much more than the minimum GPM
requirement. This implies a couple of things –
1. ARBL enjoys a premium spot in the market structure. This maybe because of the
absence of competition in the sector, which enables a few companies to enjoy
higher margins
2. Good operational efficiency, which in turn is a reflection of management’s
capabilities
Debt level – Balance Sheet check
The first three points in the checklist were mainly related to the Profit & Loss
statement of the company. We will now look through a few Balance sheet items.
One of the most important line item that we need to look at on the Balance Sheet is
the Debt. An increasingly high level of debt indicates a high degree of financial
leverage. Growth at the cost of financial leverage is quite dangerous. Also do
remember, a large debt on balance sheets means a large finance cost charge. This
eats into the retained earnings of the firm.
Here is how the debt stands for ARBL –
Debt( INR Crs) Evaluation –

FY 09-10

FY 10-11

FY 11-12

FY 12 -13

FY 13 – 14

Debt

91.19

95.04

84.07

87.17

84.28

EBIT

261

223

321

431

541

Debt/EBIT (%)

35%

42.61%

26.19%

20.22%

15.57%

The debt seems to have stabilized around 85Crs. In fact it is encouraging to see that
the debt has come down in comparison to the FY 09-10. Besides checking for the
interest coverage ratio (which we have discussed previously) I also like to check the
debt as a percent of ‘Earnings before interest and taxes’ (EBIT). This just gives a
quick perspective on how the company is managing its finance. We can see that the
Debt/EBIT ratio has consistently reduced.

142

I personally think ARBL has done a good job here by managing its debt level
efficiently.
Inventory Check
Checking for the inventory data makes sense only if the company under
consideration is a manufacturing company. Scrutinizing the inventory data helps us
in multiple ways –
1. Raising inventory with raising PAT indicates are signs of a growing company
2. A stable inventory number of days indicates management’s operational efficiency to
some extent
Let us see how ARBL fares on the inventory data –

FY 09-10

FY 10-11

FY 11-12

FY 12 -13

FY 13 – 14

Inventory (INR Crs)

217.6

284.7

266.6

292.9

335.0

Inventory Days

68

72

60

47

47

PAT (INR Crs)

167

148

215

287

367

The inventory number of days is more or less stable. In fact it does show some sign
of a slight decline. Do note, we have discussed the calculation of the inventory
number of days in the previous chapter. Both the inventory and PAT are showing a
similar growth signs which is again a good sign.
Sales vs Receivables
We now look at the sales number in conjunction to the receivables of the company.
A sale backed by receivables is not an encouraging sign. It signifies credit sales and
therefore many questions arise out of it. For instance – are the company sales
personal force selling products on credit? Is the company offering attractive (but not
sustainable) credit to suppliers to push sales?

Net Sales(INR Crs)

FY 09-10

FY 10-11

FY 11-12

FY 12 -13

FY 13 – 14

1464

1758

2360

2944

3403

143

Receivables (INR Crs)

242.3

305.7

319.7

380.7

452.6

Receivables as as a% of Net Sales

16.5%

17.4%

13.5%

12.9%

13.3%

The company has shown stability here. From the table above we can conclude a
large part of their sales is not really backed back receivables, which is quite
encouraging. In fact, just liked the inventory number of days, the receivables as % of
net sales has also showed signs of a decline, which is quite impressive.
Cash flow from Operations
This is in fact one of the most important checks one needs to run before deciding to
invest in a company. The company should generate cash flows from operations; this
is in fact where the proof of the pudding lies. A company which is draining cash
from operations raises some sort of red flag.

In INR Crs

FY 09-10

FY 10-11

FY 11-12

FY 12 -13

FY 13 – 14

Cash flow from Operations

214.2

86.1

298.4

335.4

278.7

The cash flow from operations though a bit volatile has remained positive
throughout the last 5 years. This only means ARBL’s core business operations are
generating cash and therefore can be considered successful.
Return on Equity
We have discussed at length about Return on Equity in chapter 9 of this module. I
would encourage you to go through it again if you wish to refresh. Return on Equity
(ROE) measures in percentage the return generated by the company keeping the
shareholders equity in perspective. In a sense ROE measures how successful the
promoters of the company are for having invested their own funds in the company.
Here is how ARBL’s ROE has fared for the last 5 years –

In INR Crs

FY 09-10

FY 10-11

FY 11-12

FY 12 -13

FY 13 – 14

PAT

167

148

215

287

367

144

Shareholders’ Equity

543.6

645.7

823.5

1059.8

1362.7

ROE

30.7%

22.9%

26.1%

27.1%

27.0%

These numbers are very impressive. I personally like to invest in companies that
have a ROE of over 20%. Do remember, in case of ARBL the debt is quite low, hence
the good set of return on equity numbers is not backed by excessive financial
leverage, which is again highly desirable.
Conclusion
Remember we are in stage 2 of equity research. I see ARBL qualifying quite well on
almost all the required parameters in stage 2. Now, you as an equity research
analyst have to view the output of stage 2 in conjunction with your finding from
stage 1 (which deals with understanding the business). If you are able to develop a
comfortable opinion (based on facts) after these 2 stages, then the business surely
appears to have investable grade attributes and therefore worth investing.
However before you go out and buy the stock, you need to ensure the price is right.
This is exactly what we do in stage 3 of equity research.

Key takeways from this chapter
1. ‘Limited Resource’ Equity Research can be performed in 3 stages
1. Understanding the Business
2. Application of the checklist
3. Valuations

2. The objective of the stage 1 i.e understanding the business requires us to gather all
information related to the business. The best way to go about this is the Q&A way
3. In the Q&A way, we begin with posting some simple and straightforward questions
for which we find answers
4. By the time we finish stage 1, we should be through with all the information related
to the business
5. Most of the answers required in stage 1 is present in the company’s annual report
and website
6. Do remember while researching the company in stage 1, if there is something not
very convincing about the company, it is often a good idea to stop researching
further

145

7. It is very important for you get convinced (based on true facts) about the company
in stage 1. This is how you will develop a strong conviction to stay put during bear
markets
8. Stage 2 of Equity Research requires you to evaluate the performance of the
company on various counts.
9. You will proceed to stage 3 only after the company clears in stage 1 & 2.

146

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 14

DCF Primer
47

14.1 – The Stock Price
In the previous chapter we understood stage 1 and stage 2 of equity research. Stage
1 dealt with understanding the business and stage 2 dealt with understanding the
financial performance of the company. One can proceed to stage 3, only if he is
convinced with the findings of both the earlier stages. Stage 3 deals with the stock
price valuation.
An investment is considered a great investment only if a great business is bought at
a great price. In fact, I would even stretch to say that it is perfectly fine to buy a
mediocre business, as long as you are buying it at a great price. This only shows the
significance of ‘the price’ when it comes to investing.
The objective of the next two chapters is to help you understand “the price”. The
price of a stock can be estimated by a valuation technique. Valuation per say helps
you determine the ‘intrinsic value’ of the company. We use a valuation technique
called the “Discounted Cash Flow (DCF)” method to calculate the intrinsic value of
the company. The intrinsic value as per the DCF method is the evaluation of the
‘perceived stock price’ of a company, keeping all the future cash flows in
perspective.
The DCF model is made up of several concepts which are interwoven with one
another. Naturally we need to understand each of these concepts individually and
then place it in the context of DCF. In this chapter we will understand the core
concept of DCF called “The Net Present Value (NPV)” and then we will proceed to
understand the other concepts involved in DCF, before understanding the DCF as a
whole.

147

14.2 – The future cash flow
The concept of future cash flow is the crux of the DCF model. We will understand
this with the help of a simple example.
Assume Vishal is a pizza vendor who serves the best pizza’s in town. His passion for
baking pizzas leads him to an innovation. He invents an automatic pizza maker
which automatically bakes pizzas. All he has to do is, pour the ingredients required
for making a pizza in the slots provided and within 5 minutes a fresh pizza pops out.
He figures out that with this machine, he can earn an annual revenue of
Rs.500,000/- and the machine has a life span of 10 years.
His friend George is very impressed with Vishal’s pizza machine. So much so that,
George offers to buy this machine from Vishal.
Now here is a question for you – What do you think is the minimum price that
George should pay Vishal to buy this machine? Well, obviously to answer this
question we need to see how economically useful this machine is going to be for
George. Assuming he buys this machine today (2014), over the next 10 years, the
machine will earn him Rs.500,000/- each year.
Here is how George’s cash flow in the future looks like –

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

500,000

500,000

500,000

500,000

500,000

500,000

500,000

500,000

500,000

500,000

148

Do note, for the sake of convenience, I have assumed the machine will start
generating cash starting from 2015.
Clearly, George is going to earn Rs.50,00,000/- (10 x 500,000) over the next 10 years,
after which the machine is worthless. One thing is clear at this stage, whatever is the
cost of this machine, it cannot cost more than Rs.50,00,000/-. Think about it – Does
it make sense to pay an entity a price which is more than the economic benefit it
offers?
To go ahead with our calculation, assume Vishal asks George to pay “Rs.X” towards
the machine. At this stage, assume George has two options – either pay Rs.X and
buy the machine or invest the same Rs.X in a fixed deposit scheme which not only
guarantees his capital but also pays him an interest of 8.5%. Let us assume that
George decides to buy the machine instead of the fixed deposit alternative. This
implies, George has foregone an opportunity to earn 8.5% risk free interest. This is
the ‘opportunity cost’ for having decided to buy the machine.
So far, in our quest to price the automatic pizza maker we have deduced three
crucial bits of information –
1. The total cash flow from the pizza maker over the next 10 years – Rs.50,00,000/2. Since the total cash flow is known, it also implies that the cost of the machine
should be less than the total cash flow from the machine
3. The opportunity cost for buying the pizza machine is, an investment option that
earns 8.5% interest
Keeping the above three points in perspective, let us move ahead. We will now focus
on the cash flows. We know that George will earn Rs.500,000/- every year from the
machine for the next 10 years. So think about this – George in 2014, is looking at the
future –
1. How much is the Rs.500,000/- that he receives in 2016 worth in today’s terms?
2. How much is the Rs.500,000/- that he receives in 2018 worth in today’s terms?
3. How much is the Rs.500,000/- that he receives in 2020 worth in today’s terms?
4. To generalize, how much is the cash flow of the future worth in today’s terms?
The answer to these questions lies in the realms of the “Time value of money”. In
simpler words, if I can calculate the value of all the future cash flows from that
machine in terms of today’s value, then I would be in a better situation to price that
machine.
Please note – in the next section we will digress/move away from the pizza problem,
but we will eventually get back to it.

149

14.3 – Time Value of Money (TMV)
Time value of money plays an extremely crucial role in finance. The TMV finds its
application in almost all the financial concepts. Be it discounted cash flow analysis,
financial derivatives pricing, project finance, calculation of annuities etc, the time
value of money is applicable. Think of the ‘Time value of money’ as the engine of a
car, with the car itself being the “Financial World”.
The concept of time value of money revolves around the fact that, the value of
money does not remain the same across time. Meaning, the value of Rs.100 today is
not really Rs.100, 2 years from now. Inversely, the value of Rs.100, 2 years from now
is not really Rs.100 as of today. Whenever there is passage of time, there is an
element of opportunity. Money has to be accounted (adjusted) for that opportunity.
If we have to evaluate, what would be the value of money that we have today
sometime in the future, then we need to move the ‘money today’ through the
future. This is called the “Future Value (FV)” of the money. Likewise, if we have to
evaluate the value of money that we are expected to receive in the future in today’s
terms, then we have to move the future money back to today’s terms. This is called
the “Present Value (PV)” of money.
In both the cases, as there is a passage of time, the money has to be adjusted for
the opportunity cost. This adjustment is called “Compounding” when we have to
calculate the future value of money. It is called “Discounting” when we have to
calculate the present value of money.
Without getting into the mathematics involved (which by the way is really simple) I
will give you the formula required to calculate the FV and PV.
Example 1 – How much is Rs.5000/- in today’s terms (2014) worth five years later
assuming an opportunity cost of 8.5%?
This is a case of Future Value (FV) computation, as we are trying to evaluate the
future value of the money that we have today –
Future Value = Amount * (1+ opportunity cost rate) ^ Number of years.
= 5000 *(1 + 8.5%) ^ 5
= 7518.3
This means Rs.5000 today is comparable with Rs.7518.3 after 5 years, assuming an
opportunity cost of 8.5%.
Example 2 – How much is Rs.10,000/- receivable after 6 years, worth in today’s
terms assuming an opportunity cost of 8.5%?

150

This is clearly the case of Present Value (PV) computation as we are trying to
evaluate the present value of cash receivable in future in terms of today’s value.
Present Value = Amount / (1+Discount Rate) ^ Number of years
= 10,000 / (1+ 8.5% ) ^ 6
= 6129.5
This means Rs.10,000/- receivable after 6 years in future is comparable
to Rs.6,129.5 in today’s terms assuming a discount rate of 8.5%.
Example 3 – If I reframe the question in the first example – How much is Rs.7518.3
receivable in 5 years worth in today’s terms given an opportunity cost @ 8.5%?
We know this requires us to calculate the present value. Also, since we have done
the reverse of this in example 1, we know the answer should be Rs.5000/- . Let us
calculate the present value to check this –
= 7518.3 / (1 + 8.5%) ^ 5
= 5000.0
Assuming you are clear with the concept of time value of money, I guess we are now
equipped to go back to the pizza problem.

14.4 – The Net Present Value of cash flows
We are still in the process of evaluating the price of the pizza machine. We know
George is entitled to receive a stream of cash flows (by virtue of owning the pizza
machine) in the future. The cash flow structure is as follows

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

500,000

500,000

500,000

500,000

500,000

500,000

500,000

500,000

500,000

500,000

We posted this question earlier, let me repost it again – How much is the cash flow
of the future worth in today’s terms?
As we can see, the cash flow is uniformly spread across time. We need to calculate
the present value of each cash flow (receivable in the future) by discounting it with
the opportunity cost.
Here is a table that calculates the PV of each cash flow keeping the discount rate of
8.5% –

151

Year

Cash Flow (INR)

Receivable in (years)

Present Value (INR)

2015

500,000

1

460,829

2016

500,000

2

424808

2017

500,000

3

391481

2018

500,000

4

360802

2019

500,000

5

332535

2020

500,000

6

306485

2021

500,000

7

282470

2022

500,000

8

260,335

2023

500,000

9

239,946

2024

500,000

10

221151

Total

50,00,000

32,80,842

The sum of all the present values of the future cash flow is called “The Net Present
Value (NPV)”. The NPV in this case is Rs. 32,80,842 This also means, the value of all
the future cash flows from the pizza machine in today’s terms is Rs. 32,80,842. So if
George has to buy the pizza machine from Vishal, he has to ensure the price is
Rs. 32,80,842 or lesser, but definitely not more than that and this is roughly how
much the pizza machine should cost George.

152

Now, think about this – What if we replace the pizza machine with a company? Can
we discount all future cash flows that the company earns with an intention to
evaluate the company’s stock price? Yes, we can and in fact this is exactly what will
we do in the “Discounted Cash Flow” model.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. A valuation model such as the DCF model helps us estimate the price of a stock
2. The DCF model is made up of several inter woven financial concepts
3. The ‘Time Value of Money’ is one of the most crucial concept in finance, as it finds its
application in several financial concepts including the DCF method
4. The value of money cannot be treated the same across the time scale – which
means the value of money in today’s terms is not really the same at some point in
the future
5. To compare money across time we have to ‘time travel the money’ after accounting
for the opportunity cost
6. Future Value of money is the estimation of the value of money we have today at
some point in the future
7. Present value of money is the estimation of the value of money receivable in the
future in terms of today’s value
8. The Net Present Value (NPV) of money is the sum of all the present values of the
future cash flows

153

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 15

Equity Research (Part 2)
185

15.1 – Getting started with the DCF Analysis
We discussed about “The Net Present Value (NPV)” in the previous chapter. NPV
plays a very important role in the DCF valuation model. Having understood this
concept, we now need to understand a few other topics that are related to DCF
valuation model. In fact, we will learn more about these concepts by implementing
the DCF model on Amara Raja Batteries Limited (ARBL). With this, we will conclude
the 3rdstage of Equity Research i.e ‘The Valuation’.
In the previous chapter in order to evaluate the price of the pizza machine, we
looked at the future cash flows from the pizza machine and discounted them back
to get the present value. We added all the present value of future cash flows to get
the NPV. Towards the end of the previous chapter we also toyed around with the
idea –What will happen if the pizza machine is replaced by the company’s stock?
Well, in that case we just need an estimate of the future cash flows from the
company and we will be in a position to price the company’s stock.
But what cash flow are we talking about? And how do we forecast the future cash
flow for a company?

154

15.1 – The Free Cash Flow (FCF)
The cash flow that we need to consider for the DCF Analysis is called the “Free Cash
flow (FCF)” of the company. The free cash flow is basically the excess operating cash
that the company generates after accounting for capital expenditures such as
buying land, building and equipment. This is the cash that shareholders enjoy after
accounting for the capital expenditures. The mark of a healthy business eventually
depends on how much free cash it can generate.
Thus, the free cash is the amount of cash the company is left with after it has paid
all its expenses including investments.
When the company has free cash flows, it indicates the company is a healthy
company. Hence investors often look out of such companies whose share prices
are undervalued but who have high or rising free cash flow, as they believe over
time the disparity will disappear as the share price will soon increase.
Thus the Free cash flow helps us know if the company has generated earnings in a
year or not. Hence as an investor to assess the company’s true financial health, look
at the free cash flow besides the earnings.
FCF for any company can be calculated easily by looking at the cash flow statement.
The formula is –
FCF = Cash from Operating Activities – Capital Expenditures
Let us calculate the FCF for the last 3 financial years for ARBL –

Particular

2011 -12

2012 -13

2013 -14

Cash from Operating Activities (after income tax)

Rs.296.28 Crs

Rs.335.46

Rs.278.7

Capital Expenditures

Rs.86.58

Rs.72.47

Rs.330.3

Free Cash Flow (FCF)

Rs.209.7

Rs.262.99

(Rs.51.6)

Here is the snapshot of ARBL’s FY14 annual report from where you can calculate the
free cash flow –

155

Please note, the Net cash from operating activities is computed after adjusting for
income tax. The net cash from operating activities is highlighted in green, and the
capital expenditure is highlighted in red.
You may now have a fair point in your mind – When the idea is to calculate the
future free cash flow, why are we calculating the historical free cash flow? Well, the
reason is simple, while working on the DCF model, we need to predict the future
free cash flow. The best way to predict the future free cash flow is by estimating the
historical average free cash flow and then sequentially growing the free cash flow by
a certain rate.. This is a standard practice in the industry.
Now, by how much do we grow the free cash flow is the next big question? Well, the
growth rate you would assume should be as conservative as possible. I personally
like to estimate the FCF for at least 10 years. I do this by growing the cash flow at a
certain rate for the first 5 years, and then I factor in a lower rate for the next five
years. If you are getting a little confused here, I would encourage you to go through
the following step by step calculation for a better clarity.
Step 1 – Estimate the average free cash flow
As the first step, I estimate the average cash flow for the last 3 years for ARBL –
= 209.7 + 262.99 + (51.6) / 3
=Rs.140.36 Crs

156

The reason for taking the average cash flow for the last 3 years is to ensure, we are
averaging out extreme cash flows, and also accounting for the cyclical nature of the
business. For example in case of ARBL, the latest year cash flow is negative at
Rs.51.6 Crs. Clearly this is not a true representation of ARBL’s cash flow, hence for
this reason it is always advisable to take the average free cash flow figures.
Step 2 – Identify the growth rate
Select a rate which you think is reasonable. This is the rate at which, the average
cash flow will grow going forward. I usually prefer to grow the FCF in 2 stages. The
first stage deals with the first 5 years and the 2ndstage deals with the last 5 years.
Specifically with reference to ARBL, I prefer to use 18% for the first 5 years and
around 10% for the next five years. If the company under consideration is a mature
company, that has grown to a certain size (as in a large cap company), I would
prefer to use a growth rate of 15% and 10% respectively. The idea here is to be as
conservative as possible.
Step 3 – Estimate the future cash flows
We know the average cash flow for 2013 -14 is Rs.140.26 Crs. At 18% growth, the
cash flow for the year 2014 – 2015 is estimated to be –
= 140.36 * (1+18%)
= Rs. 165.62 Crs.
The free cash flow for the year 2015 – 2016 is estimated to be –
165.62 * (1 + 18%)
= Rs. 195.43 Crs.
So on and so forth. Here is a table that gives the detailed calculation…
Estimate of future cash flow –

Sl No

Year

Growth rate assumed

Future Cash flow (INR Crs)

01

2014 – 15

18%

165.62

02

2015 – 16

18%

195.43

157

03

2016 – 17

18%

230.61

04

2017 – 18

18%

272.12

05

2018 – 19

18%

321.10

06

2019 – 20

10%

353.21

07

2020 – 21

10%

388.53

08

2021 – 22

10%

427.38

09

2022 – 23

10%

470.11

10

2023 – 24

10%

517.12

With this, we now have a fair estimate of the future free cash flow. How reliable are
these numbers you may ask. After all, predicting the free cash flow implies we are
predicting the sales, expenses, business cycles, and literally every aspect of the
business. Well, the estimate of the future cash flow is just that, it is an estimate. The
trick here is to be as conservative as possible while assuming the free cash flow
growth rate. We have assumed 18% and 10% growth rate for the future, these are
fairly conservative growth rate numbers for a well managed and growing company.

15.2 – The Terminal Value
We have tried to predict the future free cash flow for upto 10 years. But what would
happen to the company after the 10th year? Would it cease to exist? Well, it would
not. A company is expected to be a ‘going concern’ which continues to exist forever.
This also means as long as the company exists, there is some amount of free cash
being generated. However as companies mature, the rate at which the free cash is
generated starts to diminish.
The rate at which the free cash flow grows beyond 10 years (2024 onwards) is called
the “Terminal Growth Rate”. Usually the terminal growth rate is considered to be
less than 5%. I personally like to set this rate between 3-4%, and never beyond that.

158

The “Terminal Value” is the sum of all the future free cash flow, beyond the
10th year, also called the terminal year. To calculate the terminal value we just have
to take the cash flow of the 10th year and grow it at the terminal growth rate.
However, the formula to do this is different as we are calculating the value literally
to infinity.
Terminal Value = FCF * (1 + Terminal Growth Rate) / (Discount Rate – Terminal
growth rate)
Do note, the FCF used in the terminal value calculation is that of the 10th year. Let us
calculate the terminal value for ARBL considering a discount rate of 9% and terminal
growth rate of 3.5% :
= 517.12 *(1+ 3.5%) / (9% – 3.5%)
= Rs.9731.25 Crs

15.3 – The Net Present Value (NPV)
We know the future free cash flow for the next 10 years and we also know the
terminal value (which is the future free cash flow of ARBL beyond the 10th year and
upto infinity). We now need to find out the value of these cash flows in today’s
terms. As you may recall, this is the present value calculation. Once we find out the
present value, we will add up these present values to estimate the net present value
(NPV) of ARBL.
We will assume the discount rate at 9%.
For example in 2015 – 16 (2 years from now) ARBL is expected to receive Rs.195.29
Crs. At 9% discount rate the present value would be –
= 195.29 / (1+9%)^2
= Rs.164.37 Crs
So here is how the present value of the future cash flows stack up –

Sl No

Year

Growth rate

Future Cash flow (INR Crs)

Present Value (INR Crs)

1

2014 – 15

18%

165.62

151.94

2

2015 – 16

18%

195.29

164.37

159

3

2016 – 17

18%

230.45

177.94

4

2017 – 18

18%

271.93

192.72

5

2018 – 19

18%

320.88

208.63

6

2019 – 20

10%

352.96

210.54

7

2020 – 21

10%

388.26

212.48

8

2021 – 22

10%

427.09

214.43

9

2022 – 23

10%

470.11

216.55

10

2023 – 24

10%

517.12

218.54

Net Present Value (NPV) of future free cash flows

Rs.1968.14 Crs

Along with this, we also need to calculate the net present value for the terminal
value, to calculate this we simply discount the terminal value by discount rate –
= 9731.25 / (1+9%)^10
= Rs.4110.69 Crs
Therefore, the sum of the present values of the cash flows is = NPV of future free
cash flows + PV of terminal value
= 1968.14 + 4110.69
= Rs.6078.83 Crs
This means standing today and looking into the future, I expect ARBL to generate a
total free cash flow of Rs.6078.83 Crs all of which would belong to the shareholders
of ARBL.

160

15.4 – The Share Price
We are now at the very last step of the DCF analysis. We will now calculate the share
price of ARBL based on the future free cash flow of the firm.
We now know the total free cash flow that ARBL is likely to generate. We also know
the number of shares outstanding in the markets. Dividing the total free cash flow
by the total number of shares would give us the per share price of ARBL.
However before doing that we need to calculate the value of ‘Net Debt’ from the
company’s balance sheet. Net debt is the current year total debt minus current year
cash & cash balance.
Net Debt = Current Year Total Debt – Cash & Cash Balance
For ARBL this would be (based on FY14 Balance sheet) –
Net Debt = 75.94 – 294.5
= (Rs.218.6 Crs)
A negative sign indicates that the company has more cash than debt. This naturally
has to be added to the total present value of free cash flows.
= Rs.6078.83 Crs – (Rs. 218.6 Crs)
= Rs.6297.43 Crs
Dividing the above number by the total number of shares should give us the share
price of the company also called the intrinsic value of the company.
Share Price = Total Present Value of Free Cash flow / Total Number of shares
We know from ARBL’s annual report the total number of outstanding shares is
17.081 Crs. Hence the intrinsic value or the per share value is –
= Rs.6297.43 Crs / 17.081 Crs
~ Rs.368 per share!
This in fact is the final output of the DCF model.

15.5 – Modeling Error & the intrinsic value band
The DCF model though quite scientific is built on a bunch of assumptions. Making
assumptions, especially in finance takes on an art form. You get better at it, as you
progress through and gain more experience. Hence for all practical purposes, it is
advisable for us to assume (yet another assumptionJ ) that we have made a few

161

errors while making the intrinsic value calculation and hence we should
accommodate for modeling errors.
A leeway for the modeling error simply allows us to be a flexible with the calculation
of the per share value. I personally prefer to add + 10% as an upper band and – 10%
as the lower band for what I perceive as the intrinsic value of the stock.
Applying that on our calculation –
Lower intrinsic value = 368 * (1- 10%) = Rs. 331
Upper intrinsic value = Rs.405
Hence, instead of assuming Rs.368 as the fair value of the stock, I would now
assume that the stock is fairly valued between 331 and 405. This would be the
intrinsic value band.
Now keeping this value in perspective, we check the market value of the stock.
Based on its current market price we conclude the following –
1. If the stock price is below the lower intrinsic value band, then we consider the stock
to be undervalued, hence one should look at buying the stock
2. If the stock price is within the intrinsic value band, then the stock is considered fairly
valued. While no fresh buy is advisable, one can continue to hold on to the stock if
not for adding more to the existing positions
3. If the stock price is above the higher intrinsic value band, the stock is considered
overvalued. The investor can either book profits at these levels or continue to stay
put. But should certainly not buy at these levels.
Keeping these guidelines, we could check for the stock price of Amara Raja Batteries
Limited as of today (2nd Dec 2014). Here is a snapshot from the NSE’s website –

162

The stock is trading at Rs.726.70 per share! Way higher than the upper limit of the
intrinsic value band. Clearly buying the stock at these levels implies one is buying at
extremely high valuations.

15.6 –Spotting buying opportunities
Long term investment and activities surrounding long term investing is like a slow
moving locomotive train. Active trading on the other hand is like the fast bullet
train. When long term value opportunity is created, the opportunity lingers in the
market for a while. It does not really disappear in a hurry. For instance, we now
know that Amara Raja Batteries Limited is overvalued at current market price as it is
trading way higher than the upper limit of the intrinsic value band. But the scene
was totally different a year ago. Recall based on FY 2013- 2014, ARBL’s intrinsic value
band is between Rs. 331 and Rs.405.
Here is the chart of ARBL –

163

The blue highlight clearly shows that, the stock was comfortable trading within the
band for almost 5 months! You could have bought the stock anytime during the
year. After buying, all you had to do was stay put for the returns to roll!
In fact this is the reason why they say – Bear markets create value. The whole of last
year (2013) the markets were bearish, creating valuable buying opportunities in
quality stocks.

15.7 – Conclusion
Over the last 3 chapters, we have looked at different aspects of equity research. As
you may have realized, equity research is simply the process of inspecting the
company from three different perspectives (stages).
In stage 1, we looked at the qualitative aspects of the company. At this stage, we
figured out who, what, when, how, and why of the company. I consider this as an
extremely crucial stage of equity research. If something is not really convincing here,
I do not proceed further. Remember markets are an ocean of opportunities, so do
not force yourself to commit on to an opportunity that does not give you the right
vibe.
I proceed to stage 2 only after I am 100% convinced with my findings in stage 1.
Stage 2 is basically the application of the standard checklist, where we evaluate the
performance of the company. The checklist that we have discussed is just my
version, of what I think is a fairly good checklist. I would encourage you to build your
own checklist, but make sure you have a reasonable logic while including each
checklist item.
Assuming the company clears both stage 1 and 2 of equity research, I proceed to
equity research stage 3. In stage 3, we evaluate the intrinsic value of the stock and

164

compare it with the market value. If the stock is trading cheaper than the intrinsic
value, then the stock is considered a good buy. Else it is not.
When all the 3 stages align to your satisfaction, then you certainly would have the
conviction to own the stock. Once you buy, stay put, ignore the daily volatility (that is
in fact the virtue of capital markets) and let the markets take its own course.
Please note, I have included a DCF Model on ARBL, which I have built on excel. You
could download this and use it as a calculator for other companies as well.

Key takeaways from this chapter
1. The free cash flow (FCF) for the company is calculated by deducting the capital
expenditures from the net cash from operating activates
2. The free cash flow tracks the money left over for the investors
3. The latest year FCF is used to forecast the future year’s cash flow
4. The growth rate at which the FCF is grown has to be conservative
5. Terminal growth rate is the rate at which the company’s cash flow is supposed to
grow beyond the terminal year
6. The terminal value is the value of the cash flow the company generates from the
terminal year upto infinity
7. The future cash flow including the terminal value has to be discounted back to
today’s value
8. The sum of all the discounted cash flows (including the terminal value) is the total
net present value of cash flows
9. From the total net present value of cash flows, the net debt has to be adjusted.
Dividing this by the total number of shares gives us the per share value of the
company
10. One needs to accommodate for modeling errors by including a 10% band around
the share price
11. By including a 10% leeway we create a intrinsic value band
12. Stock trading below the range is considered a good buy, while the stock price above
the intrinsic value band is considered expensive
13. Wealth is created by long term ownership of undervalued stocks
14. Thus, the DCF analysis helps the investors to identify whether the current share
price of the company is justified or not.

165

Module 3 — Fundamental Analysis
Chapter 16

The Finale
161

16.1 – The follies of DCF Analysis
In this concluding chapter, we will discuss a few important topics that could
significantly impact the way you make your investment decisions. In the previous
chapter, we learnt about the intrinsic value calculation using the Discounted Cash
Flow (DCF) analysis. The DCF method is probably one of the most reliable methods
available to evaluate the intrinsic value of a company’s stock. However, the DCF
method has its fair share of drawbacks which you need to be aware of. The DCF
model is only as good as the assumptions which are fed to it. If the assumptions
used are incorrect, the fair value and stock price computation could be skewed.
1. DCF requires us to forecast – To begin with, the DCF model requires us to predict
the future cash flow and the business cycles. This is a challenge, let alone for a
fundamental analyst but also for the top management of the company
2. Highly sensitive to the Terminal Growth rate – The DCF model is highly sensitive
to the terminal growth rate. A small change in the terminal growth rate would lead
to a large difference in the final output i.e. the per share value. For instance in the
ARBL case, we have assumed 3.5% as the terminal growth rate. At 3.5%, the share
price is Rs.368/- but if we change this to 4.0% (an increase of 50 basis points) the
share price would change to Rs.394/-

166

3. Constant Updates – Once the model is built, the analyst needs to constantly modify
and align the model with new data (quarterly and yearly data) that comes in. Both
the inputs and the assumptions of the DCF model needs to be updated on a regular
basis.
4. Long term focus – DCF is heavily focused on long term investing, and thus it does
not offer anything to investors who have a short term focus. (i.e. 1 year investment
horizon)
Also, the DCF model may make you miss out on unusual opportunities as the model
are based on certain rigid parameters.
Having stated the above, the only way to overcome the drawbacks of the DCF Model
is by being as conservative as possible while making the assumptions. Some
guidelines for the conservative assumptions are –
1. FCF (Free Cash Flow) growth rate – The rate at which you grow the FCF year on
year has to be around 20%. Companies can barely sustain growing their free cash
flow beyond 20%. If a company is young and belongs to the high growth sector, then
probably a little under 20% is justified, but no company deserves a FCF growth rate
of over 20%
2. Number of years – This is a bit tricky, while longer the duration, the better it is. At
the same time longer the duration, there would be more room for errors. I generally
prefer to use a 10 year 2 stage DCF approach
3. 2 stage DCF valuation – It is always a good practice to split the DCF analysis into 2
stages as demonstrated in the ARBL example in the previous chapter. As discussed
,In stage 1 I would grow the FCF at a certain rate, and in stage 2 I would grow the
FCF at a rate lower than the one used in stage 1
4. Terminal Growth Rate – As I had mentioned earlier, the DCF model is highly
sensitive to the terminal growth rate. Simple thumb rule here – keep it as low as
possible. I personally prefer to keep it around 4% and never beyond it.

16.2 – Margin of Safety
Now, despite making some conservative assumptions things could still go wrong.
How do you insulate yourself against that? This is where the concept of ‘Margin of
Safety’ would arrive. The margin of safety thought process was popularized by
Benjamin Graham in his seminal book titled “Intelligent Investor”. The ‘margin of
safety’ simply suggests that an investor should buy stocks only when it is available at
a discount to the estimated intrinsic value calculation. Following the Margin of
Safety does not imply successful investments, but would provide a buffer for errors
in calculation.
Here is how I exercise the ‘Margin of Safety’ principle in my own investment practice.
Consider the case of Amara Raja Batteries Limited; the intrinsic value estimate was
around Rs.368/- per share. Further we applied a 10% modeling error to create the

167

intrinsic value band. The lower intrinsic value estimate was Rs.331/-. At Rs.331/- we
are factoring in modeling errors. The Margin of Safety advocates us to further
discount the intrinsic value. I usually like to discount the intrinsic value by another
30% at least.
But why should we discount it further? Aren’t we being extra conservative you may
ask? Well, yes, but this is the only way you can insulate yourself from the bad
assumptions and bad luck. Think about it, given all the fundamentals, if a stock
looks attractive at Rs.100, then at Rs.70, you can be certain it is indeed a good bet!
This is in fact what the savvy value investors always practice.
Going back to the case of ARBL –
1. Intrinsic value is Rs.368/2. Accounting for modeling errors @10% the lower intrinsic band value is Rs.331/3. Discounting it further by another 30%, in order to accommodate for the margin of
safety, the intrinsic value would be around Rs.230/4. At 230/- I would be a buyer in this stock with great conviction
Of course, when quality stocks falls way below its intrinsic value they get picked up
by value investors. Hence when the margin of safety is at play, you should consider
buying it as soon as you can. As a long term investor, sweet deals like this (as in a
quality stock trading below its intrinsic value) should not be missed.
Also, remember good stocks will be available at great discounts mostly in a bear
market, when people are extremely pessimistic about stocks. So make sure you
have sufficient cash during bear markets to go shopping!

16.3 – When to sell?
Throughout the module we have discussed about buying stocks. But what about
selling? When do we book profits? For instance assume you bought ARBL at around
Rs.250 per share. It is now trading close to Rs.730/- per share. This translates to an
absolute return of 192%. A great rate of return by any yardstick (considering the
return is generated in over a year’s time). So does that mean you actually sell out
this stock and book a profit? Well the decision to sell depends on the disruption in
investible grade attributes.
Disruption in investible grade attributes – Remember the decision to buy the
stock does not stem from the price at which the stock trades. Meaning, we do not
buy ARBL just because it has declined by 15%. We buy ARBL only because it qualifies
through the rigor of the“investible grade attributes”. If a stock does not showcase
investible grade attributes we do not buy. Therefore going by that logic, we hold on
to stocks as long as the investible grade attributes stays intact.

168

The company can continue to showcase the same attributes for years together. The
point is, as long as the attributes are intact, we stay invested in the stock. By virtue
of these attributes the stock price naturally increases, thereby creating wealth for
you. The moment these attributes shows signs of crumbling down, one can consider
selling the stock.

16.4 – How many stocks in the portfolio?
The number of stocks that you need to own in your portfolio is often debated. While
some say holding many stocks help you diversify risk, others say holding far fewer
helps you take concentrated bets which can potentially reap great rewards. Here is
what some of the legendary investors have advised when it comes to the number of
stocks in your portfolio –
Seth Kalrman – 10 to 15 stocks
Warren Buffet – 5 to 10 stocks
Ben Graham – 10 to 30 stocks
John Keynes – 2 to 3 stocks
In my own personal portfolio, I have about 13 stocks and at no point I would be
comfortable owning beyond 15 stocks. While it is hard to comment on what should
be the minimum number of stocks, I do believe there is no point owning a large
number of stocks in your portfolio. When I say large, I have a figure of over 20 in my
mind.

16.5 – Final Conclusion
Over the last 16 chapters, we have learnt and discussed several topics related to the
markets and fundamental analysis. Perhaps it is now the right time to wrap up and
leave you with a few last points that I think are worth remembering –
1. Be reasonable – Markets are volatile; it is the nature of the beast. However if you
have the patience to stay put, markets can reward you fairly well. When I say
“reward you fairly well” I have a CAGR of about 15-18% in mind. I personally think
this is a fairly decent and realistic expectation. Please don’t be swayed by abnormal
returns like 50- 100% in the short term, even if it is achievable it may not be
sustainable
2. Long term approach – I have discussed this topic in chapter 2 as to why investors
need to have a long term approach. Remember, money compounds faster the
longer you stay invested
3. Look for investible grade attributes – Look for stocks that display investible grade
attributes and stay invested in them as long as these attributes last. Book profits
when you think the company no longer has these attributes

169

4. Respect Qualitative Research – Character is more important than numbers.
Always look at investing in companies whose promoters exhibit good character
5. Cut the noise, apply the checklist – No matter how much the analyst on
TV/newspaper brags about a certain company don’t fall prey to it. You have a
checklist, just apply the same to see if it makes any sense
6. Respect the margin of safety – As this literally works like a safety net against bad
luck
7. IPO’s – Avoid buying into IPOs. IPOs are usually overpriced. However if you were
compelled to buy into an IPO then analyze the IPO in the same 3 stage equity
research methodology
8. Continued Learning – Understanding markets requires a lifetime effort. Always
look at learning new things and exploring your knowledge base.
I would like to leave you with 4 book recommendations that I think will help you
develop a great investment mindset.
1. The Essays of Warren Buffet : Lessons for Investors & Managers
2. The Little Book that Beats the Market – By Joel Greenblatt
3. The Little Book of Valuations – By Aswath Damodaran
4. The Little Book that Builds Wealth – By Pat Dorsey
So friends, with these points I would like to close this module on Fundamental
Analysis. I hope you enjoyed reading this as much as I enjoyed writing it.

170

171

